=== Original PDF page 514 ===
﻿
                               PA R T
    I         II        III   IV  V

WAYS OF WORKING WITH CELLS





                                             C H A P T E R
Analyzing Cells, Molecules,
and Systems           8





Progress in science is often driven by advances in technology. The entire field
of cell biology, for example, came into being when optical craftsmen learned to                                                                 IN THIS CHAPTER
grind small lenses of sufficiently high quality to observe cells and their substruc-
tures. Innovations in lens grinding, rather than any conceptual or philosophical    Isolating Cells and Growing
advance, allowed Hooke and van Leeuwenhoek to discover a previously unseen                                                        Them in Culturecellular world, where tiny creatures tumble and twirl in a droplet of water
(Figure 8–1).                                                                                    Purifying Proteins
   The twenty-first century is a particularly exciting time for biology. New
methods for analyzing cells, proteins, DNA, and RNA are fueling an informa-                                                                            Analyzing Proteins
tion explosion and allowing scientists to study cells and their macromolecules
in previously unimagined ways. We now have access to the sequences of many                                                                            Analyzing and Manipulating DNA
billions of nucleotides, providing the complete molecular blueprints for hun-
dreds of organisms—from microbes and mustard weeds to worms, flies, mice,    Studying Gene Function and
dogs, chimpanzees, and humans. And powerful new techniques are helping us to
                                                                         Expressiondecipher that information, allowing us not only to compile huge, detailed catalogs
of genes and proteins but also to begin to unravel how these components work                                                                       Mathematical Analysis of Celltogether to form functional cells and organisms. The long-range goal is nothing
short of obtaining a complete understanding of what takes place inside a cell as it    Function
responds to its environment and interacts with its neighbors.
   In this and the following chapter, we present some of the principal methods
used to study cells and their molecular components. Chapter 9 describes the
remarkable advances in microscopy that have helped fuel our understanding
of the structure and function of cells. In this chapter, we first discuss the rapidly
developing methods for analysis of the molecules and genes that drive cell behav-
ior. We present the techniques used to determine protein structure, function, and
interactions, and we discuss the breakthroughs in DNA technology that continue
to revolutionize our understanding of cell function. We end the chapter with an
overview of some of the mathematical approaches that are helping us understand
the enormous complexity of cells. By considering cells as dynamic systems with
many moving parts, mathematical approaches can reveal hidden insights into
                                                                                         475

=== Original PDF page 515 ===
476    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


how the many components of cells work together to produce the special qualities
of life.

ISOLATING CELLS AND GROWING THEM IN CULTURE
As described in Chapter 1, numerous model organisms are used by researchers to
unravel the molecular basis of cell biology. In the first section of this chapter, we
concern ourselves with the organisms and cells best suited for biochemical stud-
ies of proteins in the cell. Typically, we gain access to these proteins by obtaining
large numbers of cells and physically breaking them open. Unicellular organisms,
such as bacteria and yeast, are easy to produce in large amounts in the laboratory         (A)
and are rich sources of the proteins involved in fundamental cell processes. But a
deep understanding of human proteins in specific cell types requires human cells,
or at the very least cells from a mammal. Specific animal tissues can be a useful
solution, but these tend to be composed of a heterogeneous mixture of cell types.
To obtain as much information as possible about specific cell types in a tissue,
biologists have developed ways of dissociating cells from tissues and separating
them according to type. These manipulations result in a relatively homogeneous
population of cells that can then be analyzed—either directly or after their num-
ber has been greatly increased by allowing the cells to proliferate in culture.
                                                                                                                             (B)

Cells Can Be Isolated from Tissues and Grown in Culture                 Figure 8–1 Microscopic life. A sample
                                                                                                              of “diverse animalcules” seen by van
Intact tissues provide the most realistic source of material, as they represent the    Leeuwenhoek using his simple microscope.
actual cells found within the body. For some biochemical preparations, the pro-      (A) Bacteria seen in material he excavated
                                                                                             from between his teeth. Those in fig. B hetein of interest can be obtained in sufficient quantity without having to separate                                                                                               described as “swimming first forward and
the tissue or organ into cell types. Examples include the preparation of histones     then backwards” (1692). (B) The eukaryotic
from calf thymus, actin from rabbit muscle, or tubulin from cow brain. For the     green alga Volvox (1700). (Courtesy of the
majority of proteins, however, tissues are not an ideal source and it is preferable    John Innes Foundation.)
to use specific cell types grown in culture. Cultured cells provide a more homoge-
neous population of cells from which to extract material, and they are also much
more convenient to work with in the laboratory. Given appropriate surroundings,
most animal cells can live, multiply, and even express differentiated properties
in a culture dish. The cells can be watched continually under the microscope or
analyzed biochemically, and the effects of adding or removing specific molecules,
such as hormones or growth factors, can be systematically explored.
   Experiments performed on cultured cells are sometimes said to be carried
out in vitro (literally, “in glass”) to contrast them with experiments using intact
organisms, which are said to be carried out in vivo (literally, “in the living organ-
ism”). These terms can be confusing, however, because they are often used in
a very different sense by biochemists. In the biochemistry lab, in vitro refers to
reactions carried out in a test tube in the absence of living cells, whereas in vivo
refers to any reaction taking place inside a living cell, even if that cell is growing
in culture.
   Tissue culture began in 1907 with an experiment designed to settle a con-
troversy in neurobiology. The hypothesis under examination was known as the
neuronal doctrine, which proposed that each nerve fiber is the outgrowth of a
single nerve cell and not the product of the fusion of many cells. To test this con-
tention, small pieces of spinal cord were placed in lymphatic fluid in a warm,
moist chamber and observed at regular intervals under the microscope. After
a day or so, individual nerve cells could be seen extending long, thin filaments
(axons) into the clot. Thus, the neuronal doctrine received strong support, and the
foundation was laid for the cell-culture revolution.
   These original experiments on nerve fibers used cultures of small tissue
fragments called explants. Today, cultures are more commonly made from sus-
pensions of cells dissociated from tissues. The first step in isolating individual
cells is to disrupt the extracellular matrix and cell–cell junctions that hold the cells
together. For this purpose, a tissue sample is typically treated with proteolytic
enzymes (such as trypsin and collagenase) to digest proteins in the extracellular

=== Original PDF page 516 ===
ISOLATING CELLS AND GROWING THEM IN CULTURE                                             477





(A)                                                 (B)                                                                   (C)
                              20 µm                                             50 µm                                      50 µm

Figure 8-2 Light micrographs of cells in culture. (A) Mouse fibroblasts. (B) Chick myoblasts
fusing to form multinucleate muscle cells. (C) Purified rat retinal ganglion nerve cells. (D) Tobacco
cells in liquid culture. (A, courtesy of Daniel Zicha; B, courtesy of Rosalind Zalin; C, from A. Meyer-
Franke et al., Neuron 15:805–819, 1995. With permission from Elsevier; D, courtesy of Gethin
Roberts.)


matrix and with agents (such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, or EDTA) that
bind, or chelate, the Ca2+ on which cell–cell adhesion depends. The tissue can
then be teased apart into single cells by gentle agitation.
   Unlike yeast, most tissue cells are not adapted to living suspended in fluid and
require a solid surface on which to grow and divide. For cell cultures, this sup-
port is usually provided by the surface of a plastic culture dish. Cells vary in their
requirements, however, and many do not proliferate or differentiate unless the
culture dish is coated with materials that cells adhere to, such as polylysine or      (D)
extracellular matrix components.                                                                                      50 µm
   Cultures prepared directly from the tissues of an organism are called primary
cultures. These can be made with or without an initial fractionation step to sepa-
rate different cell types. In most cases, cells in primary cultures can be removed
from the culture dish and recultured repeatedly in so-called secondary cultures;
in this way, they can be repeatedly subcultured (passaged) for weeks or months.
Such cells often display many of the differentiated properties appropriate to their
origin (Figure 8–2): fibroblasts continue to secrete collagen; cells derived from
embryonic skeletal muscle fuse to form muscle fibers that contract spontane-
ously in the culture dish; nerve cells extend axons that are electrically excitable
and make synapses with other nerve cells; and epithelial cells form extensive
sheets with many of the properties of an intact epithelium. Because these proper-
ties are maintained in culture, they are accessible to study in ways that are often
not possible in intact tissues.
   Embryonic stem cells are an important cell type isolated from the early mam-
malian embryo. As described in Chapter 22, these cells are pluripotent; that
is, they have the potential to differentiate into any cell type in the body. When
cultured in the presence of the appropriate extracellular signaling factors and
nutrients, stem cells can be directed to differentiate into a wide range of specific
cell types. Under some conditions, it is even possible to stimulate these cells to
assemble into three-dimensional multicellular structures that are miniature
versions of certain organs, such as the gut. These organoids provide a powerful
tool for the analysis of tissue function (see Chapter 22).
   Cell culture is not limited to animal cells. When a piece of plant tissue is
cultured in a sterile medium containing nutrients and appropriate growth regula-
tors, many of the cells are stimulated to proliferate indefinitely in a disorganized
manner, producing a mass of relatively undifferentiated cells called a callus. If
the nutrients and growth regulators are carefully manipulated, one can induce
the formation of a shoot and then root apical meristems within the callus, and,

=== Original PDF page 517 ===
478    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


in many species, regenerate a whole new plant. Similar to animal cells, callus
cultures can be dissociated into single cells, which will grow and divide as a
suspension culture (see Figure 8–2D).

Eukaryotic Cell Lines Are a Widely Used Source
of Homogeneous Cells

The cell cultures obtained by disrupting tissues tend to suffer from a problem—
eventually the cells die. Most vertebrate cells stop dividing after a finite number
of cell divisions in culture, a process called replicative cell senescence (discussed
in Chapter 17). Normal human fibroblasts, for example, typically divide only
25–40 times in culture before they stop. In these cells, the limited proliferation
capacity reflects a progressive shortening and uncapping of the cell’s telomeres,
the repetitive DNA sequences and associated proteins that cap the ends of each
chromosome (discussed in Chapter 5). Human somatic cells in the body have
turned off production of the enzyme, called telomerase, that normally main-
tains the telomeres, which is why their telomeres shorten with each cell division.
Human fibroblasts can often be coaxed to proliferate indefinitely by providing
them with the gene that encodes the catalytic subunit of telomerase; in this case,
they can be propagated as an immortalized cell line.
  Some human cells, however, cannot be immortalized by this trick. Although
their telomeres remain long, they  still stop dividing after a limited number
 of divisions because culture conditions cause excessive stimulation of cell pro-
liferation, which activates a poorly understood protective mechanism that stops    TABLE 8–1 Some Commonly
                                                                    Used Cell Linescell division—a process sometimes called culture shock. To immortalize these
cells, one has to do more than introduce telomerase. One must also inactivate      Cell line*     Cell type and origin
the protective mechanisms, which can be done by introducing certain cancer-
promoting oncogenes (discussed in Chapter 20).                                  NIH-3T3      Fibroblast (mouse)
   Unlike human cells, most rodent cells do not turn off production of telomerase,    MDCK       Kidney epithelial cell
and therefore their telomeres do not shorten with each cell division. Therefore,                    (dog)
if culture shock can be avoided, some rodent cell types will divide indefinitely in
culture. In addition, rodent cells often undergo spontaneous genetic changes in     HeLa         Cervical epithelial cell
                                                                                               (human)culture that inactivate their protective mechanisms, thereby producing immor-
talized cell lines.                                                               PtK         Kidney epithelial cell
   Cell lines can often be most easily generated from cancer cells, but these                          (rat kangaroo)
cultures—referred to as transformed cell lines—differ from those prepared
                                                                          L6          Myoblast (rat)from normal cells in several ways. Transformed cell lines often grow without
attaching to a surface, for example, and they can proliferate to a much higher    PC12        Chromaffin cell (rat)
density in a culture dish. Similar properties can be induced experimentally in
normal cells by transforming them with a tumor-inducing virus or chemical.    COS        Kidney fibroblast
                                                                                                (monkey)The resulting transformed cell lines can usually cause tumors if injected into a
susceptible animal.                                                    HEK293     Kidney epithelial cell
   Transformed and nontransformed cell lines are extremely useful in cell                  (human)
research as sources of very large numbers of cells of a uniform type, especially
                                                         CHO        Ovary epithelial cellbecause they can be stored in liquid nitrogen at –196°C for an indefinite period
                                                                                                    (Chinese hamster)and retain their viability when thawed. It is important to keep in mind, however,
that cell lines nearly always differ in important ways from their normal progeni-    RPE          Retinal pigment
tors in the tissues from which they were derived.                                                                 epithelial cell (human)
  Some widely used cell lines are listed in Table 8–1. Different lines have dif-
                                                                                     Vero         Kidney epithelialferent advantages; for example, the PtK epithelial cell lines derived from the rat
                                                                                                                                     cell (African greenkangaroo remain flat during mitosis (unlike many other cell types), allowing the                                                                                          monkey)
mitotic apparatus to be readily observed in action.
                                                                                           Jurkat       White blood cell
Hybridoma Cell Lines Are Factories That Produce                                      (human)
Monoclonal Antibodies                                                         *Many of these cell lines were derived
                                                                                              from tumors. All of them are capable
As we see in this chapter and throughout this book, antibodies are particularly       of indefinite replication in culture and
useful tools for cell biology. Their great specificity allows precise detection of      express at least some of the special
                                                                                                               characteristics of their cells of origin.
selected proteins among the many thousands that each cell typically produces.

=== Original PDF page 518 ===
ISOLATING CELLS AND GROWING THEM IN CULTURE                                             479


SUSPENSION OF TWO CELL                                               three clones of hybrid cells     Figure 8–3 The production of hybrid
TYPES CENTRIFUGED WITH                                                                                     cells. It is possible to fuse one cell
A FUSING AGENT ADDED                             SELECTIVE MEDIUM                              with another to form a heterokaryon, a
                                         ALLOWS ONLY                                                                                    combined cell with two separate nuclei.                                          HETEROKARYONS TO
               CELL FUSION AND                   SURVIVE AND                                         Typically, a suspension of cells is treated
             FORMATION OF                     PROLIFERATE. THESE                             with certain inactivated viruses or with
             HETEROKARYONS,               BECOME HYBRID                                polyethylene glycol, each of which alters
             WHICH ARE                            CELLS, WHICH ARE                              the plasma membranes of cells in a way
             THEN CULTURED                 THEN CLONED                                                                                                             that induces them to fuse. Eventually,
                                                                                       a heterokaryon proceeds to mitosis
                                                                                   and produces a hybrid cell in which the
                                                                                     two separate nuclear envelopes have
                                                                                    been disassembled, allowing all the
                                                                                chromosomes to be brought together in a
                                                                                                              single large nucleus. Such hybrid cells can
 differentiated mouse                heterokaryon                          hybrid cell                                                                                                         give rise to immortal hybrid cell lines. If one normal cell    tumor cell
                                                                                                               of the parent cells was from a tumor cell
                                                                                                                                    line, the hybrid cell is called a hybridoma.
Antibodies are often produced by inoculating animals with the protein of interest
and subsequently isolating the antibodies specific to that protein from the serum
of the animal. However, only limited quantities of antibodies can be obtained
from a single inoculated animal, and the polyclonal antibodies produced will be a
heterogeneous mixture of antibodies that recognize a variety of different antigenic
sites on the protein. Moreover, antibodies specific for the antigen will constitute
only a fraction of the antibodies found in the serum. An alternative technology,
which allows the production of an unlimited quantity of identical antibodies and
greatly increases the specificity and convenience of antibody-based methods, is
the production of monoclonal antibodies by hybridoma cell lines.
   This procedure involves propagating a clone of cells from a single antibody-
secreting B lymphocyte to obtain a homogeneous preparation of antibodies in
large quantities. B lymphocytes normally have a limited life span in culture, but
individual antibody-producing B lymphocytes from an immunized mouse, when
fused with cells derived from a transformed B lymphocyte cell line, can give rise
to hybrids that have both the ability to make a particular antibody and the ability
to multiply indefinitely in culture (Figure 8–3). These hybridomas are propagated
as individual clones, each of which provides a permanent and stable source of
a single type of monoclonal antibody. Each type of monoclonal antibody rec-
ognizes a single type of antigenic site; for example, a particular cluster of five or
six amino acid side chains on the surface of a protein. Their uniform specificity
makes monoclonal antibodies much more useful than conventional antisera for
many purposes.
  An important advantage of the hybridoma technique is that monoclonal anti-
bodies can be made against molecules that constitute only a minor component
of a complex mixture. In an ordinary antiserum made against such a mixture, the
proportion of antibody molecules that recognize the minor component would be
too small to be useful. But if the B lymphocytes that produce the various compo-
nents of this antiserum are made into hybridomas, it becomes possible to screen
individual hybridoma clones from the large mixture to select one that produces
the desired type of monoclonal antibody and to propagate the selected hybridoma
indefinitely so as to produce that antibody in unlimited quantities. In principle,
therefore, a monoclonal antibody can be made against any protein in a biological
sample. Once an antibody has been made, it can be used to localize the protein
in cells and tissues, to follow its movement, and to purify the protein to study its
structure and function.
   Monoclonal antibodies are not just useful research tools but are valuable
as treatments for a number of human diseases. Certain cancers, for example,
can be treated by intravenous infusion of monoclonal antibodies that bind and
inhibit signaling receptors on the cancer cell surface, thereby reducing pro-
liferation of the tumor cells. In other cases, monoclonal antibodies that bind
specific cell-surface immune regulators can promote immunological attack
of cancer cells. Monoclonal antibodies that bind and inhibit specific immune-
stimulatory molecules provide useful therapies in autoimmune diseases such

=== Original PDF page 519 ===
480    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


as rheumatoid arthritis. Monoclonal antibodies against specific viral proteins
can reduce infection. Given their exquisite specificity, it is likely that monoclo-
nal antibodies will continue to be developed as effective therapies for these and
other diseases.

Summary

Tissues can be dissociated into their component cells, from which individual cell
types can be purified and used for biochemical analysis or for the establishment of
cell cultures. Many animal and plant cells survive and proliferate in a culture dish if
they are provided with a suitable culture medium containing nutrients and appro-
priate signal molecules. Although many animal cells stop dividing after a finite
number of cell divisions, cells that have been immortalized through spontaneous
mutations or genetic manipulation can be maintained indefinitely as cell lines.
Hybridoma cells are widely employed to produce unlimited quantities of uniform
monoclonal antibodies, which are used to detect and purify cell proteins, as well as
to diagnose and treat diseases.

PURIFYING PROTEINS
The challenge of isolating a single type of protein from the thousands of other
proteins in a cell is formidable but must be overcome to study protein function
in vitro. As we shall see later in this chapter, recombinant DNA technology can
enormously simplify this task by engineering cells to produce large quantities of a
given protein, thereby making its purification much easier. Whether the source of
the protein is an engineered cell or a natural tissue, a purification procedure usu-
ally starts with subcellular fractionation to reduce the complexity of the material
and is then followed by purification steps of increasing specificity.

Cells Can Be Separated into Their Component Fractions

To purify a protein, it must first be extracted from inside the cell. Cells can be
broken up in various ways: they can be subjected to osmotic shock or ultrasonic
vibration, forced through a small orifice, or ground up in a blender. These proce-
dures break many of the membranes of the cell (including the plasma membrane
and endoplasmic reticulum) into fragments that immediately reseal to form
small closed vesicles. If carefully carried out, however, the disruption procedures
leave organelles such as nuclei, mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus, lysosomes,
and peroxisomes largely intact. The suspension of cells is thereby reduced to a
thick slurry (called a homogenate or extract) that contains a variety of membrane-
enclosed organelles, each with a distinctive size and density. Provided that the
homogenization medium has been carefully chosen (by trial and error for each
organelle), the various components—including the vesicles derived from the
endoplasmic reticulum, called microsomes—retain most of their original bio-
chemical properties.
   The different components of the homogenate must then be separated. Such
cell fractionations became possible only after the commercial development
in the early 1940s of an instrument known as the preparative ultracentrifuge,
which rotates extracts of broken cells at high speeds (Figure 8–4). This treatment
separates cell components by size and density: in general, the largest objects
experience the largest centrifugal force and move the most rapidly. At relatively
low speed, large components such as nuclei sediment to form a pellet at the bot-
tom of the centrifuge tube; at slightly higher speed, a pellet of mitochondria is
deposited; and at even higher speeds and with longer periods of centrifugation,
first vesicles and then ribosomes can be collected (Figure 8–5). All of these frac-
tions are impure, but many of the contaminants can be removed by resuspending
the pellet and repeating the centrifugation procedure several times.
   Centrifugation is the first step in most fractionations, but it separates only com-
ponents that differ greatly in size. A finer degree of separation can be achieved by

=== Original PDF page 520 ===
PURIFYING PROTEINS                                                                       481



 (A)     armored          sedimenting            (B)                              sedimenting
        chamber             material                        hinge                  material





                       rotor





      refrigeration           vacuum               refrigeration                vacuum
                  motor                                      motor

Figure 8–4 The preparative ultracentrifuge. (A) The sample is contained in tubes that are
inserted into a ring of angled cylindrical holes in a metal rotor. Rapid rotation of the rotor generates
enormous centrifugal forces, which cause particles in the sample to sediment against the bottom
sides of the sample tubes, as shown here. The vacuum reduces friction, preventing heating of the
rotor and allowing the refrigeration system to maintain the sample at 4°C. (B) Some fractionation
methods require a different type of rotor called a swinging-bucket rotor. In this case, the sample
tubes are placed in metal tubes on hinges that allow the tubes to swing outward when the rotor
spins. Sample tubes are therefore horizontal during spinning, and samples are sedimented toward                                                                                                                                                                        cell
the bottom, not the sides, of the tube, providing better separation of differently sized components                              homogenate
(see Figures 8–5 and 8–6).


layering the homogenate in a thin band on top of a salt solution that fills a centri-      LOW-SPEED CENTRIFUGATION
fuge tube. When centrifuged, the various components in the mixture move as a
series of distinct bands through the solution, each at a different rate, in a process
called velocity sedimentation (Figure 8-6A). For the procedure to work effectively,
the bands must be protected from convective mixing, which would normally                                    pellet contains
occur whenever a denser solution (for example, one containing organelles) finds                             whole cells
itself on top of a lighter one (the salt solution). This is achieved by augmenting                                    nuclei                                                                                                                                        cytoskeletons
the solution in the tube with a shallow gradient of sucrose prepared by a special
mixing device. The resulting density gradient—with the dense end at the bottom      SUPERNATANT SUBJECTED TO                                                                                      MEDIUM-SPEED CENTRIFUGATION
of the tube—keeps each region of the solution denser than any solution above it,
and it thereby prevents convective mixing from distorting the separation.
  When sedimented through sucrose gradients, different cell components
separate into distinct bands that can be collected individually. The relative rate
at which each component sediments depends primarily on its size and shape—                                    pellet contains
                                                                                                                             mitochondria
normally being described in terms of its sedimentation coefficient, or S value.                                 lysosomes
Present-day ultracentrifuges rotate at speeds of up to 80,000 rpm and produce                                peroxisomes
forces as high as 500,000 times gravity. These enormous forces drive even small      SUPERNATANT SUBJECTED TO
macromolecules, such as tRNA molecules and simple enzymes, to sediment at an       HIGH-SPEED CENTRIFUGATION
appreciable rate and allow them to be separated from one another by size.
   The ultracentrifuge is also used to separate cell components on the basis of
their buoyant density, independently of their size and shape. In this case, the
sample is sedimented through a steep density gradient that contains a very high
concentration of sucrose or cesium chloride. Each cell component begins to move                                    pellet contains
                                                                                                                        microsomes
down the gradient as in Figure 8–6A, but it eventually reaches a position where                                   small vesicles
the density of the solution is equal to its own density. At this point, the component                                                                                     SUPERNATANT SUBJECTED TO
                                                                                              VERY-HIGH-SPEED CENTRIFUGATION

Figure 8–5 Cell fractionation by centrifugation. Repeated centrifugation at progressively higher
speeds will fractionate homogenates of cells into their components. In general, the smaller the
subcellular component, the greater the centrifugal force required to sediment it. Typical values for
the various centrifugation steps referred to in the figure are:                                                                                 pellet contains
low speed: 1000 times gravity for 10 minutes                                                                                   ribosomes
medium speed: 20,000 times gravity for 20 minutes                                                                                          viruses
high speed: 80,000 times gravity for 1 hour                                                                                             large macro-
                                                                                                                                molecules
very high speed: 150,000 times gravity for 3 hours

=== Original PDF page 521 ===
482    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


         (A)                                                       (B)                                      Figure 8–6 Comparison of velocity
                                                                                         sedimentation and equilibrium          VELOCITY                             EQUILIBRIUM
                                                                                               sedimentation. (A) In velocity sedimentation,       SEDIMENTATION                        SEDIMENTATION
                                                                                                             subcellular components sediment at
                                                                                                                      different speeds according to their size
                       sample                                                         and shape when layered over a solution
                                                                                                      containing sucrose. To stabilize the
                                                                      sample
                             stabilizing shallow                                                       sedimenting bands against convective
                          sucrose                                                                   mixing caused by small differences in
                          gradient                                           steep                    temperature or solute concentration,
                                 (e.g., 5–20%)                                        sucrose                   the tube contains a continuous shallow
                                                                            gradient                                                                                                       gradient of sucrose, which increases                                                                                                  (e.g., 20–70%)
                                                                                                                             in concentration toward the bottom
                                                                                                              of the tube (typically from 5 to 20%        CENTRIFUGATION
                                                                                                        sucrose). After centrifugation, the different
                                                                                   components can be collected individually,
                                                                                   most simply by puncturing the plastic
                                                                                                          centrifuge tube with a needle and collecting
                         slow-sedimenting                                                      drops from the bottom, as illustrated here.
                      component                                                                            (B) In equilibrium sedimentation, subcellular
                                                                                   components move up or down when
                          fast-sedimenting                                                              centrifuged in a gradient until they reach a
                      component                                                                                                           position where their density matches that
                                                                                                              of their surroundings. Although a sucrose
                                                                                                       gradient is shown here, denser gradients,
         FRACTIONATION                                                                   which are especially useful for protein and
                                                                                                         nucleic acid separation, can be formed
                                                                                             from cesium chloride. The final bands, at
                                                                         low-buoyant-               equilibrium, can be collected as in A.
                                                                                density
                                                                component

                                                                          high-buoyant-
                                                                                density
                                                                component





floats and can move no farther. A series of distinct bands is thereby produced in
the centrifuge tube, with the bands closest to the bottom of the tube containing
the components of highest buoyant density (Figure 8–6B). This method, called
equilibrium sedimentation, is so sensitive that it can separate macromolecules
that have incorporated heavy isotopes, such as 13C or 15N, from the same mac-
romolecules that contain the lighter, common isotopes (12C or 14N). In fact, the
cesium-chloride method was developed in 1957 to separate the labeled from the
unlabeled DNA produced after exposure of a growing population of bacteria to
nucleotide precursors containing 15N; this classic experiment provided direct
evidence for the semiconservative replication of DNA (see Figure 5–5).

Cell Extracts Provide Accessible Systems to Study Cell Functions

Studies of organelles and other large subcellular components isolated in the ultra-
centrifuge have contributed enormously to our understanding of the functions of
different cell components. Experiments on mitochondria and chloroplasts puri-
fied by centrifugation, for example, demonstrated the central function of these
organelles in converting energy into forms that the cell can use. Similarly, resealed
vesicles formed from fragments of rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(microsomes) have been separated from each other and analyzed as functional
models of these compartments of the intact cell.
    Similarly, highly concentrated cell extracts, especially undiluted cytoplasm
from Xenopus laevis (African clawed frog) oocytes and fertilized eggs, have played

=== Original PDF page 522 ===
PURIFYING PROTEINS                                                                       483


                                                                                             Figure 8–7 The formation of subcellular
                                                                                                 structures in a cytoplasmic extract.
                                                                                            Concentrated cytoplasm was prepared
                                                                                             from unfertilized eggs of the frog Xenopus
                                                                                                                        laevis. After addition of Xenopus sperm
                                                                                    chromosomes, these extracts were
                                                                                                      stimulated to progress through the cell
                                                                                                             cycle. (A) In an interphase extract, a nuclear
                                                                                             envelope (green) forms around the sperm
                                                                                chromosomes (pink). (B) In a metaphase
                                                                                                                extract, the nuclear envelope breaks down
                                                                                   and the microtubules (green) form a mitotic
                                                                                                       spindle that is attached to the condensed
                                                                                chromosomes (pink). [B, T. Maresca
         (A)                                              (B)                                                     et al., J Cell Biol. 169(6):859–69, 2005,
                                                                      10 µm                   doi 10.1083/jcb.200503031. With
                                                                                                 permission from Rockefeller University
                                                                                                            Press.]
a critical role in the study of such complex and highly organized processes as the
cell-division cycle, the assembly and function of the mitotic spindle (Figure 8–7),
and the vesicular-transport steps involved in the movement of proteins through
the secretory pathway.
   Cell extracts also provide, in principle, the starting material for the complete
separation of all of the individual macromolecular components of the cell. We
now consider how this separation is achieved, focusing on proteins.

Proteins Can Be Separated by Chromatography
Proteins are most often fractionated by column chromatography, in which a
mixture of proteins in solution is passed through a column containing a porous
gel matrix. Different proteins are retarded to different extents by their interac-
tion with the matrix, and they can be collected separately as they flow out of the
bottom of the column (Figure 8–8). Depending on the choice of matrix, proteins
can be separated according to their charge (ion-exchange chromatography),
their hydrophobicity (hydrophobic chromatography), their size (gel-filtration



                     COLUMN CHROMATOGRAPHY

                              solvent continually
                            applied to the top of
                 sample  column from a large
                   applied   reservoir of solvent





                                                                                             Figure 8–8 The separation of molecules
                                                                                by column chromatography. The sample,
                                                                                       a solution containing a mixture of different
              solid                                                                                  molecules, is applied to the top of a
            matrix                                                                                                 cylindrical glass or plastic column filled with
                                                                                       a permeable gel matrix, such as cellulose.
            porous                                                          A large amount of solvent is then passed
            plug                                                                                       slowly through the column and collected
                                                                                                                             in separate tubes as it emerges from the
                test                                                                             bottom. Because various components of
             tube
                                                                                                    the sample travel at different rates through
                               time                            fractionated molecules                  the column, they are fractionated into
                                                               eluted and collected                        different tubes.

=== Original PDF page 523 ===
484    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems



          solvent ﬂow                                       solvent ﬂow                                          solvent ﬂow


          +     + + +       positively                                                                               bead with
                +     +    charged                                                                                                   covalently            +                +                     +    bead                                          porous bead                                       attached      + +    +                 +                  + +                                                                                                                                            substrate         +    +   +         +                          bound   +                       +         +                                                                                                             bound    +                                 negatively      + +            +                + +                                                                                                               enzyme              +                             charged                   +        +                                                                               retarded                        +             +                                                                                                                              molecule                              molecule     +                   +                                                                                    small molecule             +
        +    +    +         free            +  + +                                                                            unretarded                        +   positively       +   +                                                                                                                                  other proteins                  +                                                                                    large molecule                             charged
                              molecule


 (A) ION-EXCHANGE CHROMATOGRAPHY          (B)  GEL-FILTRATION CHROMATOGRAPHY              (C)  AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY

Figure 8–9 Three types of matrices used for chromatography. (A) In ion-exchange chromatography, the insoluble matrix
carries ionic charges that retard the movement of molecules of opposite charge. Matrices used for separating proteins include
diethylaminoethylcellulose (DEAE-cellulose), which is positively charged, and carboxymethylcellulose (CM-cellulose) and
phosphocellulose, which are negatively charged. Analogous matrices based on agarose or other polymers are also frequently
used. The strength of the association between the dissolved molecules and the ion-exchange matrix depends on both the
ionic strength and the pH of the solution that is passing down the column, which may therefore be varied systematically (as
in Figure 8–10) to achieve an effective separation. (B) In gel-filtration chromatography, the small beads that form the matrix
are inert but porous. Molecules that are small enough to penetrate into the matrix beads are thereby delayed and travel more
slowly through the column than do larger molecules that cannot penetrate. Beads of cross-linked polysaccharide (dextran,
agarose, or acrylamide) are available commercially in a wide range of pore sizes, making them suitable for the fractionation
of molecules of various masses, from less than 500 daltons to more than 5 × 106 daltons. (C) Affinity chromatography uses
an insoluble matrix that is covalently linked to a specific ligand, such as an antibody molecule or an enzyme substrate, that
will bind a specific protein. Enzyme molecules that bind to immobilized substrates on such columns can be eluted with a
concentrated solution of the free form of the substrate molecule, while molecules that bind to immobilized antibodies can be
eluted by dissociating the antibody–antigen complex with concentrated salt solutions or solutions of high or low pH. High
degrees of purification can be achieved in a single pass through an affinity column.



chromatography), or their ability to bind to particular small molecules or to other
macromolecules (affinity chromatography).
  Many types of matrices are available. Ion-exchange columns (Figure 8–9A)
are packed with small beads that carry either a positive or a negative charge, so
that proteins are fractionated according to the arrangement of charges on their
surface. Hydrophobic columns are packed with beads from which hydrophobic
side chains protrude, selectively retarding proteins with exposed hydrophobic
regions. Gel-filtration columns (Figure 8–9B), which separate proteins according
to their size, are packed with tiny porous beads: molecules that are small enough
to enter the pores linger inside successive beads as they pass down the column,
while larger molecules remain in the solution flowing between the beads and
therefore move more rapidly, emerging from the column first. Besides providing
a means of separating molecules, gel-filtration chromatography is a convenient
way to estimate their size.
    Affinity chromatography (Figure 8–9C) takes advantage of the biologically
important binding interactions that occur on protein surfaces. If a substrate mol-
ecule is covalently coupled to an inert matrix such as a polysaccharide bead, the
enzyme that operates on that substrate will often be specifically retained by the
matrix and can then be eluted (washed out) in nearly pure form. Likewise, short
DNA oligonucleotides of a specifically designed sequence can be immobilized
in this way and used to purify DNA-binding proteins that normally recognize
this sequence of nucleotides in chromosomes. Alternatively, specific antibodies
can be coupled to a matrix to purify protein molecules recognized by the anti-
bodies (called immunoaffinity chromatography). Because of the great specificity
of all such affinity columns, 1000- to 10,000-fold purifications can sometimes be
achieved in a single pass.
     If one starts with a complex mixture of proteins, a single passage through an
ion-exchange or a gel-filtration column does not produce very highly purified

=== Original PDF page 524 ===
PURIFYING PROTEINS                                                                       485


                  (A) ION-EXCHANGE CHROMATOGRAPHY                                           Figure 8–10 Protein purification by
                                                                                       chromatography. Typical results obtained
                                                                        salt concentration                     when three different chromatographic steps
                                                                                                     are used in succession to purify a protein.                              protein
                                                                                                                       In this example, a homogenate of cells was
                                                                                                                                                   first fractionated by allowing it to percolate
                                                                                               through an ion-exchange resin packed into                                           amount                                                                      a column (A). The column was washed to
                                                                                     remove all unbound contaminants, and the
                                                                                 bound proteins were then eluted by pouring                                                          relative                                                                                       a solution containing a gradually increasing
                                                                                                   concentration of salt onto the top of the                                                                   activity
                                                                                            column. Proteins with the lowest affinity
                                                                                                                        for the ion-exchange resin passed directly
                       fraction number                                                              through the column and were collected in
                                       pool these fractions and apply them                           the earliest fractions eluted from the bottom
                                          to the next column below                                                                                                               of the column. The remaining proteins
                    (B) GEL-FILTRATION CHROMATOGRAPHY                                        were eluted in sequence according to
                                                                                                                          their affinity for the resin—those proteins
                                                                                                    binding most tightly to the resin requiring
                                                                                                    the highest concentration of salt to remove
                                                                                           them. The protein of interest was eluted
                                                                                                                             in several fractions and was detected by
                                                                                                                                            its enzymatic activity. The fractions with                                           amount                                                                                                                           activity were pooled and then applied
                                                             protein                                                                                                          to a gel-filtration column (B). The elution
                                                                                                           position of the still-impure protein was                                                          relative                                         activity
                                                                                                 again determined by its enzymatic activity,
                                                                                   and the active fractions were pooled and
                                                                                                                  purified to homogeneity on an affinity
                                                                                     column (C) that contained an immobilized
                       fraction number                                                                  substrate of the enzyme.
                                       pool these fractions and apply them
                                          to the next column below

                    (C) AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY



                                              protein

                                                     eluting
                                                     solution                                                                                activity                                           amount                               applied
                                                          relative                              to column




                       fraction number
                                      pool these fractions, which now contain the
                                         highly puriﬁed protein

fractions, because these methods individually increase the proportion of a given
protein in the mixture no more than twentyfold. Because most individual proteins
represent less than 1/1000 of the total cell protein, it is usually necessary to use
several different types of columns in succession to attain sufficient purity, with
affinity chromatography being the most efficient (Figure 8–10).
   Imperfections in the matrices (such as cellulose), which cause an uneven
flow of solvent through the column, limit the resolution of conventional col-
umn chromatography. Special chromatography resins (usually silica-based)
composed of tiny spheres (3–10 μm in diameter) can be packed with a spe-
cial apparatus to form a uniform column bed. Such high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) columns attain a high degree of resolution. In HPLC,
the solutes are passed through the column at high pressure and equilibrate very
rapidly with the interior of the tiny spheres, and so solutes with different affinities
for the matrix are efficiently separated from one another even at very fast flow
rates. HPLC is therefore the method of choice for separating many proteins and
small molecules.

=== Original PDF page 525 ===
486    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems

Immunoprecipitation Is a Rapid Affinity Purification Method                      gene for protein of interest
Immunoprecipitation is a useful variation on the theme of affinity chromatogra-                         INSERT DNA
phy. Specific antibodies that recognize the protein to be purified are attached to                     ENCODING PEPTIDE
small agarose beads. Rather than being packed into a column, as in affinity chro-                        EPITOPE TAG
matography, a small quantity of the antibody-coated beads is simply added to a
protein extract in a test tube and mixed in suspension for a short period of time—                      INTRODUCE
thereby allowing the antibodies to bind the desired protein. The beads are then                       INTO CELL
collected by low-speed centrifugation, and the unbound proteins in the super-
natant are discarded. This method is commonly used to purify small amounts of
enzymes from cell extracts for analysis of enzymatic activity or for identification
of associated proteins. As we describe later in this chapter, immunoprecipita-
tion also provides a method to identify DNA or RNA sequences recognized by
specific proteins.
                                                                                                      epitope-tagged
                                                                                                               protein
Genetically Engineered Tags Provide an Easy Way                                   rapid puriﬁcation of tagged protein
to Purify Proteins                                                                         and any associated proteins
Using the recombinant DNA methods discussed later in this chapter, any gene     Figure 8–11 Epitope tagging for the
                                                                                                        purification of proteins. Using standard
can be modified to produce its protein with an extra amino acid sequence that                                                                                                     genetic-engineering techniques, a short
provides a specific recognition tag, so as to make subsequent purification of the    amino acid sequence can be added
protein simple and rapid. Often the recognition tag is an antigenic determinant,     to a protein of interest. If the tag is an
or epitope, which can be recognized by a highly specific monoclonal antibody.     antigenic determinant, or epitope, it can
                                                                                  be targeted by an appropriate antibody,The antibody can then be used to purify the protein by affinity chromatogra-                                                                                         which can be used to purify the protein
phy or immunoprecipitation (Figure 8–11). Other types of tags are specifically    by immunoprecipitation or affinity
designed for protein purification. For example, a repeated sequence of the     chromatography.
amino acid histidine binds to certain metal ions, including nickel and copper.
If genetic-engineering techniques are used to attach a short string of histidines
to one end of a protein, the slightly modified protein can be retained selectively
on an affinity column containing immobilized nickel ions. Metal affinity chro-
matography can thereby be used to purify the modified protein from a complex
molecular mixture.
   In other cases, an entire protein is used as the recognition tag. When cells
are engineered to synthesize the small enzyme glutathione S-transferase (GST)
attached to a protein of interest, the resulting fusion protein can be purified from
the other contents of the cell with an affinity column containing glutathione, a
substrate molecule that binds specifically and tightly to GST.
   As a further refinement of purification methods using recognition tags, an
amino acid sequence that forms a cleavage site for a highly specific proteolytic
enzyme can be engineered between the protein of choice and the recognition
tag. Because the amino acid sequences at the cleavage site are very rarely found
by chance in proteins, the tag can later be cleaved off without destroying the
purified protein.
   This type of specific cleavage is used in an especially powerful purifica-
tion methodology known as tandem affinity purification tagging (TAP-tagging).
Here, one end of a protein is engineered to contain two recognition tags that are
separated by a protease cleavage site. The tag on the very end of the construct
is chosen to bind irreversibly to an affinity column, allowing the column to be
washed extensively to remove all contaminating proteins. Protease cleavage then
releases the protein, which is then further purified using the second tag. Because
this two-step strategy provides an especially high degree of protein purification
with relatively little effort, it is used extensively in cell biology.

Purified Cell-free Systems Are Required for the Precise Dissection
of Molecular Functions
Purified cell-free systems provide a means of studying biological processes free
from all of the complex side reactions that occur in a living cell. To make this pos-
sible, cell homogenates are fractionated with the aim of purifying each of the

=== Original PDF page 526 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      487


individual macromolecules that are needed to catalyze a biological process of
interest. For example, the experiments to decipher the mechanisms of protein
synthesis began with a cell homogenate that could translate RNA molecules to
produce proteins. Fractionation of this homogenate, step by step, produced in
turn the ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymes that together constitute the
protein-synthetic machinery. Once individual pure components were avail-
able, each could be added or withheld separately to define its exact role in the
overall process.
  A major goal for cell biologists is the reconstitution of every biological process
in a purified cell-free system. Only in this way can we define all of the components
needed for the process and control their concentrations, which is required to work
out their precise mechanism of action. Although much remains to be done, a
great deal of what we know today about the molecular biology of the cell has been
discovered by studies in such cell-free systems. They have been used, for example,
to decipher the molecular details of DNA replication and DNA transcription, RNA
splicing, protein translation, muscle contraction, particle transport along micro-
tubules, and many other processes that occur in cells.

Summary

Populations of cells can be analyzed biochemically by disrupting them and frac-
tionating their contents, allowing functional cell-free systems to be developed.
Highly purified cell-free systems are needed for determining the molecular details
of complex cell processes, and the development of such systems requires extensive
purification of all the proteins and other components involved. The proteins in
soluble cell extracts can be purified by column chromatography; depending on the
type of column matrix, biologically active proteins can be separated on the basis
of their molecular weight, hydrophobicity, charge characteristics, or affinity for
other molecules. In a typical purification, the sample is passed through several
different columns in turn, with the enriched fractions obtained from one column
being applied to the next. Recombinant DNA techniques (described later) allow                                                                             CH3
special recognition tags to be attached to proteins, thereby greatly simplifying
their purification.                                                              CH2
                                                                             CH2
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                CH2
                                                                             CH2
Proteins perform most cellular processes: they catalyze metabolic reactions, use
nucleotide hydrolysis to do mechanical work, and serve as the major structural        CH2
elements of the cell. The great variety of protein structures and functions has stim-        CH2
ulated the development of a multitude of techniques to study them.
                                                                             CH2
Proteins Can Be Separated by SDS Polyacrylamide-Gel                   CH2
Electrophoresis                                                             CH2
Proteins usually possess a net positive or negative charge, depending on the        CH2
mixture of charged amino acids they contain. An electric field applied to a solu-        CH2
tion containing a protein molecule causes the protein to migrate at a rate that                    OH                                                         O
depends on its net charge and on its size and shape. The most useful application
                                                                                               CH2of this property is sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide-gel electrophore-   O   S  O
sis (SDS-PAGE). It uses a highly cross-linked gel of polyacrylamide as the inert      O                 CH2
matrix through which the proteins migrate. The gel is prepared by polymerization                                                                                 +              SH                                                                          Na
of monomers; the pore size of the gel can be adjusted so that it is small enough
to retard the migration of the protein molecules of interest. The proteins are dis-          SDS             β-mercaptoethanol
solved in a solution that includes a powerful negatively charged detergent, sodium
dodecyl sulfate, or SDS (Figure 8–12). Because this detergent binds to hydro-     Figure 8–12 The detergent sodium
phobic regions of the protein molecules, causing them to unfold into extended    dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and the reducing
                                                                                      agent b-mercaptoethanol. These two
polypeptide chains, the individual protein molecules are released from their                                                                                              chemicals are used to solubilize proteins for
associations with other proteins or lipid molecules and rendered freely soluble in   SDS polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis.
the detergent solution. In addition, a reducing agent such as β-mercaptoethanol    The SDS is shown here in its ionized form.

=== Original PDF page 527 ===
488    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


(see Figure 8–12) is usually added to break any disulfide linkages in the pro-
teins, so that all of the constituent polypeptides in multisubunit proteins can be
analyzed separately.
  What happens when a mixture of SDS-solubilized proteins is run through a
slab of polyacrylamide gel? Each protein molecule binds large numbers of the
negatively charged detergent molecules, which mask the protein’s intrinsic
charge and cause it to migrate toward the positive electrode when a voltage is
applied. Proteins of the same size tend to move through the gel with similar
speeds because (1) their native structure is completely unfolded by the SDS, so
that their shapes are the same, and (2) they bind the same amount of SDS and
therefore have the same amount of negative charge. Larger proteins, with more
charge, are subjected to larger electrical forces but also to a larger drag. In free
solution, the two effects would cancel out, but, in the mesh of the polyacrylamide
gel, which acts as a molecular sieve, large proteins are retarded much more than
small ones. As a result, a complex mixture of proteins is fractionated into a series
of discrete protein bands mostly according to their mass (Figure 8–13). The major
proteins are readily detected by staining the proteins in the gel with a dye such as
Coomassie blue. When small amounts of protein are present and more sensitive
methods are required, gels can be treated with a silver stain, which will detect as
little as 10 ng of protein in a band. For some purposes, specific proteins can also
be labeled with a radioactive isotope tag; exposure of the gel to film or a radiation
detector results in an autoradiograph on which the labeled proteins are visible
(see Figure 8–16).
  SDS-PAGE is widely used because it can separate all types of proteins, includ-
ing those that are normally insoluble in water—such as the many proteins in


(A)               sample loaded onto gel                                 (B)      protein with two
                       by pipette                                             subunits, A and B,
                                                                             joined by a disulﬁde           single-subunit
    cathode                                                                     bridge                     protein
                                                       plastic casing               A        B               C

                                                                                              S-S





                                                               HEATED WITH SDS AND MERCAPTOETHANOL
 buffer
                                                                                            _                                                                              ___ __      _____ ___                                                                                        __                                                                                   _ __     gel                                  + anode                                                                                                                        _                                                                                                                                                           _____ ____                                                                       SH                                                                                                                                    __         ______ _ _                                                                                                          ___ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _                                                                                                                                 _____                                                                                                                                                                                                             ____                                                                                                                                                                                  ___                                                                                  _ _                                                                                                          _____                                                                                                             _ _ ____                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ______                                                                       HS                                                                                           _______________                                                                                                                      _  _________                                                                                                                                                                              _____ __                                                                                                      negatively                                                                                          _                                                                                       _ __                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _____________________                                                                                            charged                                                                                             SDS                                                                                                C                                                                                                                                              _____________________                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ____________________                                                                                                                   ________ _                                                                                       _                                                                                         _                                                                                          _                                                                                                 molecules                                                                                           _ _ _ _                                                       A            B

     buffer                                                                  POLYACRYLAMIDE-GEL ELECTROPHORESIS


Figure 8–13 SDS polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
(A) An electrophoresis apparatus, in which a polyacrylamide gel is
sandwiched between two glass plates, with each end of the gel immersed       B
in a buffer connected to an electrode. (B) Individual polypeptide chains
form a complex with negatively charged molecules of sodium dodecyl          C
sulfate (SDS) and therefore migrate as a negatively charged SDS–protein
complex through a porous gel of polyacrylamide. Because smaller
polypeptides move more quickly through the gel, this technique can be
used to determine the approximate mass of a polypeptide chain as well as     A
the subunit composition of a protein complex. If the protein contains a large
amount of carbohydrate, however, it will move anomalously on the gel,
and its apparent mass estimated by SDS-PAGE will be misleading. Other
                                                                                    +modifications, such as phosphorylation, can also cause small changes in a
protein’s migration in the gel.                                                               slab of polyacrylamide gel

=== Original PDF page 528 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      489


Figure 8–14 Analysis of protein samples by SDS polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis. The           1    2    3    4    5
photograph shows a Coomassie blue–stained gel that has been used to detect the proteins                                         mass
present at successive stages in the purification of an enzyme. The leftmost lane (lane 1) contains                                             (kilodaltons)
the complex mixture of proteins in the starting cell extract, and each succeeding lane analyzes                                      100
the proteins obtained after a chromatographic fractionation of the protein sample analyzed in the
previous lane (see Figure 8–10). The same total amount of protein (10 μg) was loaded onto the gel
at the top of each lane. Individual proteins normally appear as sharp, dye-stained bands; a band
broadens, however, when it contains a large amount of protein. (From T. Formosa and B.M. Alberts,
J. Biol. Chem. 261:6107–6118, 1986.)

                                                                                                                         40

membranes. And because the method separates polypeptides by size, it provides
information about the mass and subunit composition of proteins. Figure 8–14
presents a photograph of a gel that has been used to analyze each of the succes-
sive stages in the purification of a protein.

Two-dimensional Gel Electrophoresis Provides Greater
Protein Separation

Because different proteins can have similar sizes, shapes, masses, and overall
charges, most separation techniques such as SDS polyacrylamide-gel electropho-                                 15
resis or ion-exchange chromatography cannot typically separate all the proteins
in a cell or even in an organelle. In contrast, two-dimensional gel electropho-
resis, which combines two different separation procedures, can resolve up to
2000 proteins in the form of a two-dimensional protein map.
   In the first step, the proteins are separated by their intrinsic charges. The sam-
ple is dissolved in a small volume of a solution containing a nonionic (uncharged)
detergent, together with β-mercaptoethanol and the denaturing reagent urea.
This solution solubilizes, denatures, and dissociates all the polypeptide chains
but leaves their intrinsic charge unchanged. The polypeptide chains are then
separated in a pH gradient by a procedure called isoelectric focusing, which takes
advantage of the variation in the net charge on a protein molecule with the pH of
its surrounding solution. Every protein has a characteristic isoelectric point, the
pH at which the protein has no net charge and therefore does not migrate in an
electric field. In isoelectric focusing, proteins are separated electrophoretically in
a narrow tube of polyacrylamide gel in which a gradient of pH is established by a
mixture of special buffers. Each protein moves to a position in the gradient that
corresponds to its isoelectric point and remains there (Figure 8–15). This is the
first dimension of two-dimensional polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis.
   In the second step, the narrow tube of gel containing the separated proteins is
soaked in SDS and placed along the top edge of an SDS polyacrylamide-gel slab.
Electrophoresis is then carried out as in one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, and each
polypeptide chain migrates into the gel to form a discrete spot. The only proteins
left unresolved are those that have both identical sizes and identical isoelectric
                                                                                             Figure 8–15 Separation of proteinpoints, a relatively rare situation. Even trace amounts of each polypeptide chain
                                                                                      molecules by isoelectric focusing.
                                                                                                 At low pH (high H+ concentration), the
                                                                                                        carboxylic acid groups of proteins tend to
                                                                                  be uncharged (–COOH) and their nitrogen-
                                                                                                      containing basic groups fully charged (for
          + + +         at low pH,                                                                                            example, –NH3+), giving most proteins
    4      ++ + ++        theis positivelyprotein                                                         a net positive charge. At high pH, the
    5                  charged     + + –                                                            carboxylic acid groups are negatively
                                +   +                                                   charged (–COO–) and the basic groups
    6                                 – + –                       – + –  – + –  at the isoelectric       tend to be uncharged (for example, –NH2),    gradient                                                    +    +   +  point, the protein    7                                                             – + +– – + –  has no net charge       giving most proteins a net negative charge. pH                                                                and therefore no       At its isoelectric point, a protein has no net

                                                                                                    electric                                                              ––                             the                                                                                               ﬁeld;       charges                                                                                                           balance.                                                                                                              Thus,                                                                                               when a                                                                                                                          tube   stable 8                                + –                               longer migrates in      charge because the positive and negative
                                                                                      for the                                                                                        protein                                                       –– – +    9                    at high pH,                                                                                                      containing                                                                                                a fixed                                                                                   pH gradient                                                                                                                                                                               is                                                                                                                               subjected
                                                                        shown, the                             protein                  – –    the                                                                                               isoelectric pH           to a strong electric field in the appropriate   10                                     is negatively                                                                                                                       is 6.5                     direction, each protein species migrates                      –– – –––  charged                                                                                                                                 until it forms a sharp band at its isoelectric
                                                                                                               point, as shown.

=== Original PDF page 529 ===
490    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


         basic                                   stable pH gradient                                  acidic      Figure 8–16 Two-dimensional
                                                                                            polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis.
                                                                                                                                       All the proteins in an Escherichia coli
                                                                                                                bacterial cell are separated in this gel,
    100                                                                                                                   in which each spot corresponds to a
                                                                                                                      different polypeptide chain. The proteins
                                                                                       were first separated on the basis of their
                                                                                                                    isoelectric points by isoelectric focusing inkilodaltons)                                                                                                  the horizontal dimension. They were then
in                                                                                                               further fractionated according to their mass
     50                                                                                by electrophoresis from top to bottom in
(mass                                                                                                  the presence of SDS. Note that different
                                                                                                         proteins are present in very different
                                                                                         amounts. The bacteria were fed with a
                                                                                                    mixture of radioisotope-labeled amino acidsmigration                                                                                     so that all of their proteins were radioactive
SDS   25                                                                             and could be detected by autoradiography.
                                                                                                   (Courtesy of Patrick O’Farrell.)





can be detected on the gel by various staining procedures—or by autoradiogra-
phy if the protein sample was initially labeled with a radioisotope (Figure 8–16).
The technique has such great resolving power that it can distinguish between
two proteins that differ in only a single charged amino acid or a single negatively
charged phosphorylation site.

Specific Proteins Can Be Detected by Blotting with Antibodies                       (kilodaltons)mass
A specific protein can be identified after its fractionation on a polyacrylamide gel
by exposing all the proteins on the gel to a specific antibody that has been labeled                130
with a radioactive isotope or a fluorescent dye. This procedure is normally carried
out after transferring all of the separated proteins in the gel onto a sheet of nitro-                100
cellulose paper or nylon membrane. Placing the membrane against the gel and
driving the proteins out of the gel with a strong electric current transfers the pro-                 55
tein onto the membrane. The membrane is then soaked in a solution of labeled
antibody to reveal the protein of interest. This method of detecting proteins is
                                                                                                         35
called Western blotting, or immunoblotting (Figure 8–17). Sensitive Western-
blotting methods can detect very small amounts of a specific protein (1 nanogram
or less) in a total cell extract or some other heterogeneous protein mixture. The
method can be very useful when assessing the amounts of a specific protein in                 15
the cell or when measuring changes in those amounts under various conditions.

Hydrodynamic Measurements Reveal the Size and Shape                                         (A)      (B)
of a Protein Complex                                                                 Figure 8–17 Western blotting. In this
                                                                                                  experiment, proteins of the budding yeast
Most proteins in a cell are subunits of larger complexes, and knowledge of the    Saccharomyces cerevisiae were separated
size and shape of these complexes often leads to insights regarding their function.    on a polyacrylamide gel. In (A), the gel was
This information can be obtained in several ways. Sometimes, a complex can be     stained with Coomassie blue to reveal the
directly visualized using electron microscopy, as described in Chapter 9. A com-    most abundant proteins. In (B), the proteins
                                                                                                                             in the gel were transferred to a membrane
plementary approach relies on the hydrodynamic properties of a complex; that is,                                                                                   and exposed to antibodies directed against
its behavior as it moves through a liquid medium. Usually, two separate measure-    a specific protein. Unbound antibodies
ments are made. One measure is the velocity of a complex as it moves under the    were washed away, and antibodies
influence of a centrifugal field produced by an ultracentrifuge (see Figure 8–6A).    bound to the protein were detected with a
The sedimentation coefficient (or S value) obtained depends on both the size and     fluorescent label. By this sensitive Western
                                                                                                                 blotting method, small amounts of a single
the shape of the complex and does not, by itself, convey especially useful infor-                                                                                                             rare protein can be detected in a complex
mation. However, once a second hydrodynamic measurement is performed—by     mixture of other proteins. (Courtesy of
charting the migration of a complex through a gel-filtration chromatography    Jonathan Asfaha.)

=== Original PDF page 530 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      491


column (see Figure 8–9B)—both the approximate shape of a complex and its
mass can be calculated.
   The mass of a protein complex can also be determined more directly by using
an analytical ultracentrifuge, a complex device that allows protein absorbance
measurements to be made on a sample while it is subjected to centrifugal forces.
In this approach, the sample is centrifuged until it reaches equilibrium, where
the centrifugal force on a protein complex exactly balances its tendency to diffuse
away. Because this balancing point is dependent on a complex’s mass but not on
its particular shape, the mass can be directly calculated.

Mass Spectrometry Provides a Highly Sensitive Method
for Identifying Unknown Proteins

A frequent problem in cell biology and biochemistry is the identification of a pro-
tein or collection of proteins that has been obtained by one of the purification
procedures discussed in the preceding pages. Because the genome sequences of
most experimental organisms are known, catalogs of all the proteins produced in
those organisms are available. The task of identifying an unknown protein (or col-
lection of unknown proteins) thus reduces to matching some of the amino acid
sequences present in the unknown sample with known cataloged genes. This task
is now performed almost exclusively by mass spectrometry in conjunction with
computer searches of databases.
   Charged particles have very precise dynamics when subjected to electric and
magnetic fields in a vacuum. Mass spectrometry exploits this principle to separate
ions according to their mass-to-charge (m/z) ratio. It is an enormously sensitive
technique. It requires very little material and is capable of determining the pre-
cise mass of intact proteins and of peptides derived from them by enzymatic or
chemical cleavage. Masses can be obtained with great accuracy, often with an
error of less than one part in a million.
   Mass spectrometry is performed using complex instruments with three major
components (Figure 8–18A). The first is the ion source, which transforms tiny
amounts of a peptide sample into a gas containing individual charged peptide
molecules. These ions are accelerated by an electric field into the second compo-
nent, the mass analyzer, where electric or magnetic fields are used to separate the
ions on the basis of their mass-to-charge ratios. Finally, the separated ions collide
with a detector, which generates a mass spectrum containing a series of peaks
representing the masses of the molecules in the sample.
   There are many different types of mass spectrometer, varying mainly in the
nature of their ion sources and mass analyzers. One of the most common ion
sources depends on a technique called matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
(MALDI). In this approach, the proteins in the sample are first cleaved into short
peptides by a protease such as trypsin. These peptides are mixed with an organic
acid and then dried onto a metal or ceramic slide. A brief laser burst is directed
toward the sample, producing a gaseous puff of ionized peptides, each carrying
one or more positive charges. In many cases, the MALDI ion source is coupled to
a mass analyzer called a time-of-flight (TOF) analyzer, which is a long chamber
through which the ionized peptides are accelerated by an electric field toward
a detector. Their mass and charge determine the time it takes them to reach the
detector: large peptides move more slowly, and more highly charged molecules
move more quickly. By analyzing those ionized peptides that bear a single charge,
the precise masses of peptides present in the original sample can be determined.
This information is then used to search genomic databases, in which the masses
of all proteins and of all their predicted peptide fragments have been tabulated
from the genomic sequences of the organism. An unambiguous match to a par-
ticular open reading frame can often be made by knowing the mass of only a few
peptides derived from a given protein.
   By employing two mass analyzers in tandem (an arrangement known as
tandem mass spectrometry, or MS/MS; Figure 8–18B), it is possible to directly
determine the amino acid sequences of individual peptides in a complex mixture.

=== Original PDF page 531 ===
492    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems



(A) STANDARD MASS SPECTROMETRY (MS)                                                100
 peptide
 mixture
                                                                                                                                                                                                      abundance

                +                                                     +                                +                                           +                              +                                     +             +                                         +             +                              +                                      + +                            +                                            +       +                                  +                +                                                                                                                                                                                relative
                                                  0
                                                          1000        1500        2000         2500        ion source         mass         detector
                                                                     mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)                          analyzer


(B) TANDEM MASS SPECTROMETRY (MS/MS)                                                                 100
 peptide
 mixture
                                       inert gas                                                                                                       abundance
                   MS1               MS2
                               +                                    +                +         +             +                                     +                              +             +                                 +                           +                +           +     +                                                                                                                                       relative
                                                                   0
        ion source      mass   fragmentation   mass     detector          200                600               1000
                          ﬁlter                   analyzer                                mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)
                     (precursor ion             (product ion
                         selection)                   analysis)

Figure 8–18 The mass spectrometer. (A) Mass spectrometers used in biology contain an ion source that generates gaseous
peptides or other molecules under conditions that render most molecules positively charged. The two major types of ion
source are MALDI and electrospray, as described in the text. Ions are accelerated into a mass analyzer, which separates
the ions on the basis of their mass and charge by one of three major methods: (1) Time-of-flight (TOF) analyzers determine
the mass-to-charge ratio of each ion in the mixture from the rate at which it travels from the ion source to the detector.
(2) Quadrupole mass filters contain a long chamber lined by four electrodes that produce oscillating electric fields that
govern the trajectory of ions; by varying the properties of the electric field over a wide range, a spectrum of ions with specific
mass-to-charge ratios is allowed to pass through the chamber to the detector, while other ions are discarded. (3) Ion traps
contain doughnut-shaped electrodes producing a three-dimensional electric field that traps all ions in a circular chamber; the
properties of the electric field can be varied over a wide range to eject a spectrum of specific ions to a detector. (B) Tandem
mass spectrometry typically involves two mass analyzers separated by a collision chamber containing an inert, high-energy
gas. The electric field of the first mass analyzer is adjusted to select a specific peptide ion, called a precursor ion, which is
then directed to the collision chamber. Collision of the peptide with gas molecules causes random peptide fragmentation,
primarily at peptide bonds, resulting in a highly complex mixture of fragments containing one or more amino acids from
throughout the original peptide. The second mass analyzer is then used to measure the masses of the fragments (called
product or daughter ions). With computer assistance, the pattern of fragments can be used to deduce the amino acid
sequence of the original peptide.


The MALDI-TOF instrument described above is not ideal for this method. Instead,
MS/MS typically involves an electrospray ion source, which produces a continu-
ous thin stream of peptides that are ionized and accelerated into the first mass
analyzer. The mass analyzer is typically either a quadrupole or ion trap, which
employs large electrodes to produce oscillating electric fields inside the cham-
ber containing the ions. These instruments act as mass filters: the electric field
is adjusted over a broad range to select a single peptide ion and discard all the
others in the peptide mixture. In tandem mass spectrometry, this single ion is
then exposed to an inert, high-energy gas, which collides with the peptide, result-
ing in fragmentation, primarily at peptide bonds. The second mass analyzer then
determines the masses of the peptide fragments, which can be used by computa-
tional methods to determine the amino acid sequence of the original peptide and
thereby identify the protein from which it came.
  Tandem mass spectrometry is also useful for detecting and precisely mapping
post-translational modifications of proteins, such as phosphorylation or acety-
lation. Because these modifications impart a characteristic mass increase to an
amino acid, they are easily detected during the analysis of peptide fragments in
the second mass analyzer, and the precise site of the modification can often be
deduced from the spectrum of peptide fragments.
  A powerful, “two-dimensional” mass spectrometry technique can be used
to determine all of the proteins present in an organelle or another complex mix-
ture of proteins. First, the mixture of proteins present is digested with trypsin to

=== Original PDF page 532 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      493


produce short peptides. Next, these peptides are separated by an automated high-
performance form of liquid chromatography (LC). Every peptide fraction from
the chromatographic column is injected directly into an electrospray ion source
on a tandem mass spectrometer, providing the amino acid sequence and post-
translational modifications for every peptide in the mixture. This method, often
called LC-MS/MS, is used to identify hundreds or thousands of proteins in com-
plex protein mixtures from specific organelles or from whole cells. It can also be
used to map all of the phosphorylation sites in the cell, or all of the proteins targeted
by other post-translational modifications such as acetylation or ubiquitylation.

Sets of Interacting Proteins Can Be Identified
by Biochemical Methods

Because most proteins in the cell function as part of complexes with other pro-
teins, an important way to begin to characterize the biological role of an unknown
protein is to identify all of the other proteins to which it specifically binds.
  A key method for identifying proteins that bind to one another tightly is
co-immunoprecipitation. A target protein is immunoprecipitated from a cell
lysate using specific antibodies coupled to beads, as described earlier. If the tar-
get protein is associated tightly enough with another protein when it is captured
by the antibody, the partner precipitates as well and can be identified by mass
spectrometry. This method is useful for identifying proteins that are part of a com-
plex inside cells, including those that interact only transiently; for example, when
extracellular signal molecules stimulate cells (discussed in Chapter 15).

Optical Methods Can Monitor Protein Interactions

Once two proteins—or a protein and a small molecule—are known to associate,
it becomes important to characterize their interaction in more detail. Proteins
can associate with each other more or less permanently (like the subunits of RNA
polymerase or the proteasome), or engage in transient encounters that may last
only a few milliseconds (like a protein kinase and its substrate). To understand
how a protein functions inside a cell, we need to determine how tightly it binds
to other proteins and how covalent modifications, small molecules, or other
proteins influence these interactions.
   As we discussed in Chapter 3 (see Figure 3–42), the extent to which two
proteins interact is determined by the rates at which they associate and dissoci-
ate. These rates depend, respectively, on the association rate constant (kon) and
dissociation rate constant (koff). The kinetic rate constant koff is a particularly
useful number because it provides valuable information about how long two
proteins remain bound to one another. The ratio of the two kinetic constants
(kon/koff) yields another very useful number called the equilibrium constant
(K, also known as Keq or Ka), the inverse of which is the more commonly used dis-
sociation constant, Kd. The equilibrium constant is useful as a general indicator of
the affinity of the interaction, and it can be used to estimate the amount of bound
complex at different concentrations of the two protein partners—thereby provid-
ing insights into the importance of the interaction at the protein concentrations
found inside the cell.
  A wide range of methods can be used to determine binding constants for a
two-protein complex. In a simple equilibrium binding experiment, two proteins
are mixed at a range of concentrations, allowed to reach equilibrium, and the
amount of bound complex is measured; half of the protein complex will be bound
at a concentration that is equal to Kd. Equilibrium experiments often involve the
use of radioactive or fluorescent tags on one of the protein partners, coupled with
biochemical or optical methods for measuring the amount of bound protein. In
a more complex kinetic binding experiment, the kinetic rate constants are deter-
mined using rapid methods that allow real-time measurement of the formation
of a bound complex over time (to determine kon) or the dissociation of a bound
complex over time (to determine koff).

=== Original PDF page 533 ===
494    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems



                                     FAST       depolarized                          280
                               TUMBLING     emission

          polarization
              ﬁlter                                          low anisotropy                 (mP)  200
                                       free molecule X

                              SLOW       polarized                           120                               TUMBLING     emission                                                                                                                anisotropy

                                                              high anisotropydepolarized           polarized                                                          40
 excitation            excitation                                                            0     10     20     30     40     50
    light                   light                                                                             receptor concentration (µM)

(A)                          bound     receptor                                         (B)
                               molecule X


   Optical techniques provide particularly rapid, convenient, and accurate     Figure 8–19 Measurement of binding
binding measurements, and in some cases the proteins do not even need to     with fluorescence anisotropy. This
                                                                                 method depends on a fluorescently taggedbe labeled. Certain amino acids (tryptophan, for example) exhibit weak fluo-                                                                                                          protein that is illuminated with polarized
rescence that can be detected with sensitive fluorimeters. In many cases, the      light at the appropriate wavelength for
fluorescence intensity, or the emission spectrum of fluorescent amino acids      excitation; a fluorimeter is used to measure
located in a protein–protein interface, will change when two proteins associate.     the intensity and polarization of the emitted
When this change can be detected by fluorimetry, it provides a simple and sen-       light. If the fluorescent protein is fixed in
                                                                                                           position and therefore does not rotatesitive measure of protein binding that is useful in both equilibrium and kinetic                                                                                                    during the brief period between excitation
binding experiments. A related but more widely useful optical binding technique    and emission, then the emitted light will
is based on fluorescence anisotropy, a change in the polarized light that is emitted    be polarized at the same angle as the
by a fluorescently tagged protein in the bound and free states (Figure 8–19).            excitation light. This directional effect is
   Another optical method for probing protein interactions uses green fluorescent     called fluorescence anisotropy. Protein
                                                                                             molecules in solution rotate or tumble
protein (discussed in detail later) and its derivatives of different colors. In this appli-                                                                                                                        rapidly, however, so that there is a decrease
cation, two proteins of interest are each labeled with a different fluorescent protein,      in the amount of anisotropic fluorescence.
such that the emission spectrum of one fluorescent protein overlaps the absorp-     Larger molecules tumble at a slower rate
tion spectrum of the second. If the two proteins come very close to each other    and therefore have higher fluorescence
(within about 1–5 nm), the energy of the absorbed light is transferred from one     anisotropy. (A) To measure the binding
                                                                                     between a small molecule and a large
fluorescent protein to the other. The energy transfer, called fluorescence resonance                                                                                                    receptor protein, the smaller molecule is
energy transfer (FRET), is determined by illuminating the first fluorescent protein     labeled with a fluorophore. In the absence
and measuring emission from the second (see Figure 9–19). When combined with      of its binding partner, the molecule tumbles
fluorescence microscopy, this method can be used to characterize protein–protein      rapidly, resulting in low fluorescence
                                                                                                     anisotropy (top). When the small moleculeinteractions at specific locations inside living cells (discussed in Chapter 9).                                                                                                binds to its larger partner, however, it
                                                                                            tumbles less rapidly, resulting in an increase
Protein Structure Can Be Determined Using X-ray Diffraction                 in fluorescence anisotropy (bottom). (B) In
                                                                                                    the equilibrium binding experiment shown
A deep understanding of protein function in the cell requires knowledge of its     here, a small, fluorescent peptide ligand
three-dimensional structure at atomic resolution, revealing the precise position    was present at a low concentration, and
                                                                                                    the amount of fluorescence anisotropy (inof every amino acid in the protein. Structural analysis provides powerful insights                                                                                                                      millipolarization units; mP) was measured
into the mechanisms underlying a protein’s enzymatic activity and its interactions      after incubation with various concentrations
with other proteins or small molecules. Numerous methods are used to unravel      of a larger protein receptor for the ligand.
protein structure. In this chapter, we discuss well-established methods that    From the hyperbolic curve that fits the data,
depend on x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.         it can be seen that 50% binding occurred
                                                                                                              at about 10 μM, which is equal to theChapter 9 describes recently developed methods by which electron microscopy                                                                                                          dissociation constant Kd for the binding
is being used to determine the high-resolution structures of larger proteins and      interaction.
protein complexes.
   For many decades, the primary technique for protein structural analysis has
been x-ray crystallography. X-rays, like light, are a form of electromagnetic radia-
tion, but they have a much shorter wavelength, typically around 0.1 nm (the
diameter of a hydrogen atom). If a narrow beam of parallel x-rays is directed at
a sample of a pure protein, most of the x-rays pass straight through it. A small
fraction, however, is scattered by the atoms in the sample. If the sample is a well-
ordered crystal, the scattered waves reinforce one another at certain points and
appear as diffraction spots when recorded by a suitable detector (Figure 8–20).
   The slowest step in this technique is likely to be the generation of suitable protein
crystals. This step requires large amounts of very pure protein and often involves

=== Original PDF page 534 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      495



                                                                                 x-ray diffraction pattern
                                                                      obtained from the protein crystal



                                                                          diffracted beams




                                           protein crystal


                  beam of x-rays


                                                       beam
                                                                        stop




   x-ray source

(A)                                              (B)





                                                                                                       (C)





Figure 8–20 X-ray crystallography. (A) A narrow beam of x-rays is
directed at a well-ordered crystal (B). Shown here is a protein crystal of
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco), an enzyme
with a central role in CO2 fixation during photosynthesis. The atoms in
the crystal scatter some of the beam, and the scattered waves reinforce
one another at certain points and appear as a pattern of diffraction spots
(C). This diffraction pattern, together with the amino acid sequence of the
protein, can be used to produce an atomic model (D). A simplified version
of the model (E) shows the protein’s main structural features more clearly
(α helices, green; β strands, red). The components pictured in A–E are not
shown to scale. (B, courtesy of C. Branden; C, courtesy of J. Hajdu and I.
Andersson; D and E, PDB code: 1RBL.)                                                  (D)                                       (E)

years of trial and error to discover the proper crystallization conditions; the pace has
greatly accelerated with the use of recombinant DNA techniques to produce pure
proteins and robotic techniques to test large numbers of crystallization conditions.
   The position and intensity of each spot in the x-ray diffraction pattern con-
tain information about the locations of the atoms in the crystal that gave rise
to  it. Computer-assisted computational methods process the diffraction pat-
tern to generate a three-dimensional electron-density map. Interpreting this
map—translating its contours into a three-dimensional structure—can be a labo-
rious procedure. Largely by trial and error, the sequence and the electron-density
map are correlated by computer to give the best possible fit. The reliability of the
final atomic model depends on the resolution of the original crystallographic
data: 0.5-nm resolution might produce a low-resolution map of the polypeptide
backbone, whereas a resolution of 0.15 nm allows all of the non-hydrogen atoms
in the molecule to be reliably positioned.
  A complete atomic model is often too complex to appreciate directly, but sim-
plified versions that show a protein’s essential structural features can be readily
derived from it. The three-dimensional structures of tens of thousands of different
proteins have been determined—enough to allow the grouping of common struc-
tures into families (Movie 8.1). These structures or protein folds often seem to be
more conserved in evolution than are the amino acid sequences that form them
(see Figure 3–13).

=== Original PDF page 535 ===
496    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems

NMR Can Be Used to Determine Protein Structure in Solution
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has been widely used for
many years to analyze the structure of small molecules, small proteins, or pro-
tein domains. Unlike x-ray crystallography, NMR does not depend on having a
crystalline sample. It simply requires a small volume of concentrated protein
solution that is placed in a strong magnetic field; indeed, it is the main technique
that yields detailed evidence about the three-dimensional structure of molecules
in solution.
   Certain atomic nuclei, particularly hydrogen nuclei, have a magnetic moment
or spin; that is, they have an intrinsic magnetization, like a bar magnet. When
exposed to a strong magnetic field in an NMR experiment, the spin of these nuclei
aligns with the magnetic field, but it can be forced into a misaligned, excited
state by radiofrequency (RF) pulses of electromagnetic radiation. As the excited
hydrogen nuclei return to their aligned state, they emit RF radiation, which can
be measured and displayed as a spectrum. The signal of the emitted radiation,
called the chemical shift, depends on the environment of each hydrogen nucleus,
such that every nucleus in a protein displays a slightly different chemical shift.
Furthermore, if one nucleus is excited, it influences the absorption and emission
of radiation by other nuclei that lie close to it. It is consequently possible, by an
ingenious elaboration of the basic NMR technique known as two-dimensional
(2D) NMR, to distinguish the signals from hydrogen nuclei in different amino
acid residues and to identify and measure the small changes in these signals that
occur when these hydrogen nuclei lie close enough together to interact. Because
the size of such a change reveals the distance between the interacting pair of
hydrogen atoms, NMR can provide information about the distances between
the parts of the protein molecule. Additional information can be gained by
heteronuclear 2D NMR, which analyzes hydrogen nuclei in parallel with the
nuclei of a nitrogen isotope. By combining this information with a knowledge
of the amino acid sequence, it is possible in principle to compute the three-
dimensional structure of the protein (Figure 8–21). For technical reasons, NMR
spectroscopy is used primarily to determine the structure of small proteins of
about 30,000 daltons or less.
   Because NMR studies are performed in solution, this method also offers a con-
venient means of monitoring changes in protein structure; for example, during
protein folding or when the protein binds to another molecule. NMR is also used
widely to investigate molecules other than proteins and is valuable, for example,
as a method to determine the three-dimensional structures of RNA molecules
and the complex carbohydrate side chains of glycoproteins.





                                                                                             Figure 8–21 NMR spectroscopy. (A) An
                                                                                       example of the data from an NMR machine.
                                                                                                      This NMR spectrum, displaying chemical
                                                                                                                         shifts of hydrogen nuclei in two dimensions,
                                                                                                                                       is derived from the C-terminal domain of
                                                                                                    the enzyme cellulase. The spots away from
                                                                                                    the diagonal represent interactions between
                                                                                         hydrogen atoms that are near neighbors
                                                                                                                             in the protein; their positions reflect the
                                                                                                   distance that separates them. Complex
                                                                                        computing methods, in conjunction with
                                                                                                    the known amino acid sequence, enable
                                                                                                     possible compatible structures to be
                                                                                                         derived. (B) Ten structures of the enzyme,
                                                                                                                                                        all of which satisfy the distance constraints
                                                                                                          equally well, are shown superimposed on
                                                                                    one another, giving a good indication of
                                                                                                    the probable three-dimensional structure.
(A)                                                                            (B)                                (Courtesy of P. Kraulis.)

=== Original PDF page 536 ===
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                                                      497


  A major problem in structural biology  is the analysis of large protein
complexes, which are difficult to crystallize and too large for NMR analysis. Single-
particle analysis by cryo-electron microscopy provides a relatively straightforward
approach to the analysis of large macromolecular assemblies, as we describe in
Chapter 9.

Protein Sequence and Structure Provide Clues About
Protein Function

Having discussed methods for purifying and analyzing proteins, we now turn to
a common situation in cell and molecular biology: an investigator has identified
a gene important for a biological process but has no direct knowledge of the
biochemical properties of its protein product.
   Thanks to the proliferation of protein and nucleic acid sequences that are
cataloged in genome databases, the function of a gene—and its encoded pro-
tein—can often be predicted by simply comparing its sequence with those of
previously characterized genes. Because amino acid sequence determines pro-
tein structure, and structure dictates biochemical function, proteins that share
a similar amino acid sequence usually have the same structure and usually
perform similar biochemical functions, even when they are found in distantly
related organisms. Thus, the study of a newly discovered protein usually begins
with a search for previously characterized proteins that are similar in their amino
acid sequences.
   Searching a collection of known sequences for similar genes or proteins simply
involves selecting a database and entering the desired sequence. A sequence-
alignment program—the most popular is BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool)—scans the database for similar sequences by sliding the submitted
sequence along the archived sequences until a cluster of residues falls into full or                                                                                             Figure 8–22 Results of a BLAST search.
partial alignment (Figure 8–22).                                                   Sequence databases can be searched
   As was explained in Chapter 3, many proteins that adopt the same confor-     to find similar amino acid or nucleic acid
mation and have related functions are too distantly related to be identified from     sequences. Here, a search for proteins
a comparison of their amino acid sequences alone (see Figure 3–13). Thus, an      similar to the human cell-cycle regulatory
                                                                                                          protein Cdk1 (Query) locates maize Cdk1
ability to reliably predict the three-dimensional structure of a protein from its                                                                                                                        (Sbjct), which is 68% identical to human
amino acid sequence would improve our ability to infer protein function from the    Cdk1 in its amino acid sequence. The
sequence information in genomic databases. In recent years, major progress has     alignment begins at residue 57 of the Query
been made in predicting the precise structure of a protein. These predictions are      protein, suggesting that the human protein
based, in part, on our knowledge of the thousands of protein structures that have    has an N-terminal region that is absent
                                                                                             from the maize protein. The green blocks
already been determined by x-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy and,                                                                                                            indicate differences in sequence, and the
in part, on computations using our knowledge of the physical forces acting on     yellow bars summarize the similarities:
the atoms. However, it remains a substantial and important challenge to predict    when the two amino acid sequences are
                                                                                                                       identical, the residue is shown; similar
                                                                                      amino acid substitutions are indicated by
                                                                                       a plus sign (+). Only one small gap has
                                                                                    been introduced—indicated by the red
                                                                                        arrowhead at position 194 in the Query
                                                                                  sequence—to align the two sequences
                                                                                                       maximally. The alignment score (Score),
                                                                                         which is expressed in two different types
                                                                                                               of units, takes into account penalties for
                                                                                                            substitutions and gaps; the higher the
                                                                                                 alignment score, the better the match. The
                                                                                                            significance of the alignment is reflected in
                                                                                                    the Expectation (E) value, which specifies
                                                                          how often a match this good would be
                                                                                          expected to occur by chance. The lower
                                                                                                    the E value, the more significant the
                                                                                           match; the extremely low value here (e–111)
                                                                                                          indicates certain significance. E values
                                                                          much higher than 0.1 are unlikely to reflect
                                                                                                            true relatedness. For example, an E value
                                                                                                               of 0.1 means there is a 1 in 10 likelihood
                                                                                                             that such a match would arise solely
                                                                                       by chance.

=== Original PDF page 537 ===
498    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


the structures of proteins that are large or have multiple domains or to predict
structures at the very high levels of resolution needed to assist in computer-based
drug discovery.
   While finding related sequences and structures for a new protein will provide
many clues about its function, it is usually necessary to test these insights through
direct experimentation. However, the clues generated from sequence compari-
sons typically point the investigator in the correct experimental direction, and
their use has therefore become one of the most important strategies in modern
cell biology.

Summary

Many methods exist for identifying proteins and analyzing their biochemical
properties, structures, and interactions with other proteins. The most powerful
and commonly used methods include protein separation by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, protein analysis by mass spectrometry, and high-resolution struc-
tural determination. Because proteins with similar structures often have similar
functions, the biochemical activity of a protein can often be predicted by search-
ing databases for previously characterized proteins that are similar in their amino
acid sequences.

ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA
Until the early 1970s, DNA was the most difficult biological molecule for the bio-
chemist to analyze. Enormously long and chemically monotonous, the string of
nucleotides that forms the genetic material of an organism could be determined
only indirectly, from protein sequence or by genetic analysis. Today, the situation
has changed entirely. From being the most difficult macromolecule of the cell to
analyze, DNA has become the easiest. It is now possible to determine the entire
nucleotide sequence of a bacterial or fungal genome in a matter of hours and the
sequence of an individual human genome in less than a day. Once the nucleotide
sequence of a genome is known, any individual gene can be easily isolated, and
large quantities of the gene product (be it RNA or protein) can be made either by
introducing the gene into bacteria or animal cells and coaxing these cells to over-
express the foreign gene or by synthesizing the gene product in vitro. In this way,
proteins and RNA molecules that might be present in only tiny amounts in living
cells can be produced in large quantities for biochemical and structural analyses.
And this approach can also be used to produce large quantities of human proteins
(such as insulin, or interferon, or blood-clotting proteins) for use as human phar-
maceuticals. As we will see later in this chapter, it is also possible for scientists to
alter an isolated gene and transfer it back into the germ line of an animal or plant,
so as to become a functional and heritable part of the organism’s genome. In this
way, the biological roles of any gene can be assessed by observing—in the whole
organism—the results of modifying it.
   The ability to manipulate DNA with precision in a test tube or an organ-
ism, known as recombinant DNA technology, has had a dramatic impact on
all aspects of cell and molecular biology. We now describe the key features of
these techniques.

Restriction Nucleases Cut Large DNA Molecules into Specific
Fragments

Unlike a protein, a gene does not exist as a discrete entity in cells, but rather as
a small region of a much longer DNA molecule. Although the DNA molecules
in a cell can be randomly broken into small pieces by mechanical force, a frag-
ment containing a single gene in a mammalian genome would still be only one
among a hundred thousand or more DNA fragments, indistinguishable in their
average size. How could such a gene be separated from all the others? Because
all DNA molecules consist of an approximately equal mixture of the same four

=== Original PDF page 538 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          499


nucleotides, they cannot be readily separated, as proteins can, on the basis of their
different charges and biochemical properties. The solution to this problem began
to emerge with the discovery of restriction nucleases. These enzymes, which are
purified from bacteria, cut the DNA double helix at specific sites defined by the
local nucleotide sequence, thereby cleaving a long, double-strand DNA molecule
into fragments of strictly defined sizes.
   Like many of the tools of recombinant DNA technology, restriction nucleases
were discovered by researchers trying to understand an intriguing biological phe-
nomenon. It had been observed that certain bacteria always degraded “foreign”
DNA that was introduced into them experimentally. A search for the mechanism
responsible revealed a then unanticipated class of bacterial nucleases that cleave
DNA at specific nucleotide sequences. The bacterium’s own DNA is protected
from cleavage by methylation of these same sequences, thereby protecting the
bacterium from being overrun by foreign DNA. Because these enzymes restrict
the transfer of DNA into bacteria, they were called restriction nucleases. The
pursuit of this seemingly arcane biological puzzle set off the development of tech-
nologies that have forever changed the way cell and molecular biologists study
living things.
   Different bacterial species produce different restriction nucleases, each cut-
ting at a different, specific nucleotide sequence (Figure 8–23). Because these
target sequences are short—generally four to eight nucleotide pairs—many sites
of cleavage will occur, purely by chance, in any long DNA molecule. The reason
restriction nucleases are so useful in the laboratory is that each enzyme will
always cut a particular DNA molecule at the same sites. Thus for a given sample of
DNA (which contains many identical molecules), a particular restriction nuclease
will reliably generate the same set of DNA fragments.
   The size of the resulting fragments depends on the length of the target
sequences of the restriction nucleases. As shown in Figure 8–23, the enzyme
HaeIII cuts at a sequence of four nucleotide pairs; a sequence this long would
be expected to occur purely by chance approximately once every 256 nucleotide
pairs (1 in 44). In comparison, a restriction nuclease with a target sequence that
is eight nucleotides long would be expected to cleave DNA on average once every
65,536 nucleotide pairs (1 in 48). This difference in sequence selectivity makes it
possible to cleave a long DNA molecule into the fragment sizes that are most suit-
able for a given application.

                                                                                             Figure 8–23 Restriction nucleases cleave
Gel Electrophoresis Separates DNA Molecules of Different Sizes      DNA at specific nucleotide sequences.
                                                                                                       Like the sequence-specific DNA-binding
The same types of gel-electrophoresis methods that have proved so useful in the                                                                                                         proteins we encountered in Chapter 7
analysis of proteins (see Figure 8–13) can be applied to DNA molecules. The pro-     (see Figure 7–9), restriction enzymes often
cedure is actually simpler than for proteins: because each nucleotide in a nucleic    work as dimers, and the DNA sequence
acid molecule carries a single negative charge (on the phosphate group), there     that each restriction enzyme recognizes
is no need to add the negatively charged detergent SDS that is required to make    and cleaves is often symmetrical around
                                                                                       a central point. Here, both strands of
protein molecules move uniformly toward the positive electrode. Larger DNA                                                                                                    the DNA double helix are cut at specific
                                                                                                       points within the target sequence
                                                                                                           (orange). Some enzymes, such as HaeIII,
              cleavage site                                                                           cut straight across the double helix and
                                                                                                      leave two blunt-ended DNA molecules;
         5′     G G C C              HaeIII               5′    G G        C C       3′                  with others, such as EcoRI and HindIII,
                                                         +                                the cuts on each strand are staggered.
         3′      C C G G                                      3′    C C       G G       5′               These staggered cuts generate “sticky
                                                                                           ends”—short, single-strand overhangs
                                                                                                             that help the cut DNA molecules join back
         5′    G A A T T C           EcoRI        5′   G            A A T T C       3′            together through complementary base-
                                                         +                                     pairing. This rejoining of DNA molecules
         3′    C T T A A G                           3′    C T T A A            G       5′         becomes important for DNA cloning, as
                                                                       we discuss later. Restriction nucleases are
                                                                                                            usually obtained from bacteria, and their
                                                                              names reflect their origins; for example, the
         5′    A A G C T T            HindIII       5′   A            A G C T T       3′
                                                         +                          enzyme EcoRI comes from Escherichia coli.
         3′     T T C G A A                           3′     T T C G A            A       5′          Hundreds of different restriction enzymes
                                                                                                     are commercially available.

=== Original PDF page 539 ===
500    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


fragments will migrate more slowly because their progress is impeded to a greater     Figure 8–24 DNA molecules can
extent by the gel matrix. In less than an hour, the DNA fragments become spread    be separated by size using gel
                                                                                                     electrophoresis. (A) Schematic illustration
out across the gel according to size, forming a ladder of discrete bands, each com-                                                                                           comparing the results of cutting the same
posed of a collection of DNA molecules of identical length (Figure 8–24A and B).   DNA molecule (in this case, the genome of
To separate DNA molecules longer than 500 nucleotide pairs, the gel is made of    a virus that infects wasps) with two different
a diluted solution of agarose (a polysaccharide isolated from seaweed). For DNA      restriction nucleases, EcoRI (middle) and
                                                                                                                           HindIII (right). The fragments are thenfragments less than 500 nucleotides long, specially designed polyacrylamide gels                                                                                                 separated by gel electrophoresis using a gel
allow the separation of molecules that differ in length by as little as a single nucle-     matrix of agarose. Because larger fragments
otide (Figure 8–24C).                                                                            migrate more slowly than smaller ones,
  A variation of agarose-gel electrophoresis, called pulsed-field gel electro-     the lowermost bands on the gel contain the
phoresis, makes it possible to separate extremely long DNA molecules, even     smallest DNA fragments. The sizes of the
                                                                                                 fragments can be estimated by comparingthose found in whole chromosomes. Ordinary gel electrophoresis fails to                                                                                     them to a set of DNA fragments of known
separate very large DNA molecules because the steady electric field stretches     sizes (left). (B) Photograph of an actual
them out so that they travel end-first through the gel in snake-like con-     agarose gel showing DNA bands that have
figurations at a rate that is independent of their length. In pulsed-field gel    been stained with ethidium bromide. (C) A
electrophoresis, by contrast, the direction of the electric field changes peri-     polyacrylamide gel with small pores was
                                                                                        used to separate short DNA molecules that
odically, which forces the molecules to reorient before continuing to move                                                                                                                                       differ by only a single nucleotide. Shown
snake-like through the gel. This reorientation takes much more time for larger     here are the results of a dideoxy sequencing
molecules, so that longer molecules move more slowly than shorter ones. As      reaction, explained later in this chapter. From
a consequence, entire bacterial or yeast chromosomes separate into discrete        left to right, the bands in the four lanes were
bands in pulsed-field gels and so can be sorted and identified on the basis of    produced by adding G, A, T, and C chain-
                                                                                                            terminating nucleotides (see Figure 8-42). The
their size (Figure 8–24D). Although a typical mammalian chromosome of 108   DNA molecules were labeled with 32P, and
nucleotide pairs is still too long to be sorted even in this way, large segments of     the image shown was produced by laying a
these chromosomes are readily separated and identified if the chromosomal     piece of photographic film over the gel and
                                                                                                            allowing the 32P to expose the film, producing
                                                                                                       the dark bands observed when the film was
           DNA   double-stranded                                                             developed. (D) The technique of pulsed-field
                   size      DNA                                                                    agarose-gel electrophoresis was used to
              markers                                                                              separate the 16 different chromosomes of
                                                                                                       the yeast species Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
                 CUT         CUT                                                        which range in size from 220,000 to 2.5
                WITH        WITH                                                                           million nucleotide pairs. The DNA was stained
                    EcoRI           HindIII                                                       as in panel B. DNA molecules as large as
                                                                                           107 nucleotide pairs can be separated in
                                                                                                                             this way. (B, from U. Albrecht et al., J. Gen.
                                                                                                                                      Virol. 75:3353–3363, 1994; C, courtesy of
                                                                                            Leander Lauffer and Peter Walter; D, from D.
           LOAD DNA ONTO GEL                                                                              Vollrath and R.W. Davis, Nucleic Acids Res.
           AND APPLY VOLTAGE                                                            15:7865–7876, 1987. With permission from
 negative                                                                                        Oxford University Press.)
 electrode                                top                                                                         50

         23
                                                                                                12             2.5
                                                                                                 4             million
                                                                                                15
                                                                                                 7
         9
                                                                                                16           1000)                                                                                                                     950,000    (× 6.5                                                                                     13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     number           pairs                                    direction                            30                                     nucleotide
                                             of                                                                                                                                                                     pairs                        2             pairs          4.3
                                        migration                                                  14
                                                                                                10
                                                                                                11                      nucleotide                                                                                                                     610,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   chromosome                                                                                                 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nucleotide                        8
          2.3
          2                                                                                      9
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 1            220,000

                                                                         10
 positive  +
 electrode                            bottom
(A)              slab of agarose gel                       (B)                                   (C)                        (D)

=== Original PDF page 540 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          501


DNA is first cut with a restriction nuclease selected to recognize sequences
that occur only rarely.
   The DNA bands on agarose or polyacrylamide gels are invisible unless the
DNA is labeled or stained in some way. A particularly sensitive method of stain-
ing DNA is to soak the gel in the dye ethidium bromide, which fluoresces under
ultraviolet light when it is bound to DNA (see Figure 8–24B and D). Even more
sensitive detection methods incorporate a radioisotope or chemical marker into
the DNA molecules before electrophoresis, as we next describe.

Purified DNA Molecules Can Be Specifically Labeled with
Radioisotopes or Chemical Markers in Vitro

The DNA polymerases that synthesize and repair DNA (discussed in Chapter 5)
have become important tools in experimentally manipulating DNA. They are
often used in the test tube to create exact copies of existing DNA molecules.     Figure 8–25 Methods for labeling DNA
                                                                                      molecules in vitro. (A) A purified DNAIn some experiments, the copies can include specially modified nucleotides                                                                                           polymerase enzyme can incorporate
(Figure 8–25). To synthesize DNA in this way, the DNA polymerase is presented     radiolabeled nucleotides as it synthesizes
with a template and a pool of nucleotide precursors that contain the modification.    new DNA molecules. In this way,
As long as the polymerase can use these precursors, it automatically makes new,     radiolabeled versions of any DNA sequence
modified molecules that match the sequence of the template. Modified DNA mol-    can be prepared in the laboratory. (B) The
                                                                                  method in panel A is also used to produceecules have many uses. DNA labeled with the radioisotope 32P can be detected                                                                                                    nonradioactive DNA molecules that carry
after gel electrophoresis by exposing the gel to photographic film or a radiation    a specific chemical marker that can be
detector (see Figure 8–24C). Other types of modified DNA, such as that labeled by     detected with an appropriate antibody.
digoxigenin (see Figure 8–25B), are useful for visualizing DNA molecules in whole    The base on the nucleoside triphosphate
cells, a topic we discuss later in this chapter.                                      shown is an analog of thymine, in which
                                                                                                    the methyl group on T has been replaced
                                                                                       by a spacer arm linked to the plant steroid
Genes Can Be Cloned Using Bacteria                                                digoxigenin. An anti-digoxigenin antibody
                                                                                           coupled to a visible marker such as a
Any DNA fragment can be cloned. In molecular biology, the term DNA cloning     fluorescent dye is then used to visualize the
refers to the act of making many identical copies (typically billions) of a DNA    DNA. Other chemical labels, such as biotin,
molecule; that is, the amplification of a specific DNA sequence (often a particu-    can be attached to nucleotides and used
                                                                                                                             in the same way. The only requirements
lar gene) from the rest of the cell’s genome. We note that elsewhere in the book,                                                                                                     are that the modified nucleotides properly
cloning can also refer to the generation of many genetically identical cells starting     base-pair and appear “normal” to the
from a single cell or even to the generation of genetically identical organisms (see,   DNA polymerase.



(A)                                                     (B)
  puriﬁed fragment of duplex DNA          O
5′                                             3′
3′                                             5′                             digoxigenin
                         O                                  OH
               denature and anneal with                                                                                                   spacer
               mixture of hexanucleotides
                                                                                                                                                           this region still
                                                                                                                                              available for
                                                                                                                                            base-pairing                                                   H5′                                              3′                                                                                                                                  with A                                                         O         O                                OH
                                                   N                        H         +                                O                 N          N
                                       H
                                              O
3′                                             5′                                        H        N   O

                                              O    O    O
             add DNA polymerase and
                 32P-labeled nucleotides                             O–  P  O   P  O   P  O    O
                                                         O–    O–    O–
5′                                             3′
                   3′                   5′                                                                         modiﬁed nucleoside      OH H
         +                                                                        triphosphate
    5′                                 3′
3′                                             5′
 DNA polymerase incorporates 32P nucleotides,
  resulting in a population of radiolabeled DNA
  molecules that contain sequences from both strands

=== Original PDF page 541 ===
502    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


         circular,                                                                                Figure 8–26 The insertion of a DNA                                        DNA fragment
    double-strand                                                           to be cloned                           fragment into a bacterial plasmid with
     plasmid DNA                                                                             the enzyme DNA ligase. The plasmid is
    (cloning vector)                                                      recombinant DNA                                                                                                    cut open with a restriction nuclease (in this
                                                                                                 case, one that produces staggered ends)
                                                                                   and is mixed with the DNA fragment to be
                                                                                             cloned (which has been prepared with the
                                                                             same restriction nuclease). DNA ligase and
                  CLEAVAGE WITH                  COVALENT                                                                             ATP are added. The staggered ends base-                     RESTRICTION                      LINKAGE
                    NUCLEASE                   BY DNA LIGASE                                     pair, and DNA ligase seals the nicks in the
                                                                   DNA backbone, producing a complete
                                                                                            recombinant DNA molecule. In the
                                                                                     accompanying micrographs, the inserted
                                                                   DNA is colored red. (Micrographs courtesy
                                                                                                              of Huntington Potter and David Dressler.)





                                               200 nm                        200 nm


for example, Figure 7–2). In all cases, cloning refers to the act of making many
identical copies, and here we use the term to refer to methods designed to gener-
ate many identical copies of a defined segment of nucleic acid.
  DNA cloning can be accomplished in several ways. One of the simplest involves
inserting a particular fragment of DNA into the purified DNA of a self-replicating
genetic element—usually a plasmid. The plasmid vectors most widely used
for gene cloning are small, circular molecules of double-stranded DNA
derived from plasmids that occur naturally in bacterial cells. They gener-
ally account for only a minor fraction of the total host bacterial cell DNA, but
owing to their small size, they can easily be separated from the much larger
chromosomal DNA molecules. For use as cloning vectors, the purified plas-
mid DNA circles are first cut with a restriction nuclease to create linear DNA
molecules. The DNA to be cloned is added to the cut plasmid and then cova-
lently joined using the enzyme DNA ligase (Figure 8–26 and Figure 8–27). As
discussed in Chapter 5, this enzyme is used by the cell to stitch together the
Okazaki fragments produced during DNA replication. The recombinant DNA
circle is introduced back into bacterial cells that have been made transiently
permeable to DNA. As the cells grow and divide, doubling in number every                                                                                             Figure 8–27 DNA ligase can join together
30 minutes, the recombinant plasmids also replicate to produce an enormous    any two DNA fragments in vitro to
                                                                                  produce recombinant DNA molecules.
                                                                             ATP provides the energy necessary to
                                                                                                           reseal the sugar–phosphate backbone of                                                                      5′     G
                                                                   DNA (see Figure 5–12). (A) DNA ligase can
                                                                      3′       C T T A A                              readily join two DNA fragments produced
                                                                                       by the same restriction nuclease, in this
                                                          STAGGERED END FILLED IN     case EcoRI. Note that the staggered
                                                        BY DNA POLYMERASE + dNTPs
                                                                                     ends produced by this enzyme enable
                                                                                                    the ends of the two fragments to base-5′     G            A A T T C          3′          5′     G A A T T       C C          3′
                   +                                              +                        pair correctly with each other, greatly
3′       C T T A A            G          5′          3′       C T T A A      G G          5′       facilitating their rejoining. (B) DNA ligase
                                                                                      can also be used to join DNA fragments
                                                                                       produced by different restriction nucleases;
             + ligase       ATP                               + ligase       ATP              for example, EcoRI and HaeIII. In this
                                                                                                 case, before the fragments undergo
                                                                                                                           ligation, DNA polymerase plus a mixture
                                                                                                              of deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates          5′     G A A T T C          3′                             5′     G A A T T C C          3′
                                                                                            (dNTPs) are used to fill in the staggered cut
          3′       C T T A A G          5′                             3′       C T T A A G G          5′     produced by EcoRI. Each DNA fragment
                                                                               shown in the figure is oriented so that its 5′
                                                                                     ends are at the left end of the upper strand
    (A)  JOINING TWO FRAGMENTS CUT                    (B)  JOINING TWO FRAGMENTS CUT           and the right end of the lower strand,
      BY THE SAME RESTRICTION NUCLEASE            BY DIFFERENT RESTRICTION NUCLEASES      as indicated.

=== Original PDF page 542 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          503


          DOUBLE-STRAND                                                                    Figure 8–28 A DNA fragment can be
          RECOMBINANT                                                                        replicated inside a bacterial cell. To
           PLASMID DNA                                                                        clone a particular fragment of DNA, it is
         INTRODUCED INTO                                                                                                                                                   first inserted into a plasmid vector, as           BACTERIAL CELL
                                                                               shown in Figure 8–26. The resulting
                                                                                            recombinant plasmid DNA is then
                                                                                                  introduced into a bacterium, where it is
                                                                                                            replicated many millions of times as the
                                                                                              bacterium multiplies. For simplicity, the
                                                                             genome of the bacterial cell is not shown.
       bacterial
            cell                                          cell culture produces    many copies of puriﬁed
                                        hundreds of millions of     plasmid isolated from
                                     new bacteria               lysed bacteria


number of copies of DNA circles containing the foreign DNA (Figure 8–28).
Once the cells are lysed and the plasmid DNA isolated, the cloned DNA frag-
ment can be readily recovered by cutting it out of the plasmid DNA with the
same restriction nuclease that was used to insert it, and then separating it
from the plasmid DNA by gel electrophoresis. Together, these steps allow the
amplification and purification of any segment of DNA from the genome of
any organism.
  A particularly useful plasmid vector is based on the naturally occurring F
plasmid of E. coli. Unlike smaller bacterial plasmids, the F plasmid—and its engi-
neered derivative, the bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)—is present in only
one or two copies per E. coli cell. The fact that BACs are kept in such low numbers
means that they can stably maintain very long DNA sequences, up to 1 million
nucleotide pairs in length. With only a few BACs present per bacterium, it is less
likely that the cloned DNA fragments will become scrambled by recombination
with sequences carried on other copies of the plasmid. Because of their stability,          human double-stranded DNA
ability to accept large DNA inserts, and ease of handling, BACs are the preferred                    CLEAVE WITH
vector for handling large fragments of foreign DNA.                                                      RESTRICTION
                                                                                                   NUCLEASE
An Entire Genome Can Be Represented in a DNA Library

Often it is useful to break up a genome into much smaller fragments and clone
every fragment, separately, using a plasmid vector. This approach is useful
because it allows scientists to work with easily managed, discrete pieces of a
genome instead of whole, unwieldy chromosomes.
   This strategy involves cleaving genomic DNA into small pieces using a restric-
tion nuclease (or, in some cases, by mechanically shearing the DNA) and ligating                   millions of genomic                                                                                 DNA fragments
the entire collection of DNA fragments into plasmid vectors, using conditions that
favor the insertion of a single DNA fragment into each plasmid molecule. These                DNA FRAGMENTS
                                                                                                            INSERTED INTO
recombinant plasmids are then introduced into E. coli at a concentration that                    PLASMIDS
ensures that no more than one plasmid molecule is taken up by each bacterium.
The collection of cloned plasmid molecules is known as a DNA library. Because the
DNA fragments were derived directly from the chromosomal DNA of the organism
of interest, the resulting collection—called a genomic library—will represent the                             recombinant
entire genome of that organism (Figure 8–29), spread out over tens of thousands                     DNA molecules
of individual bacterial colonies.
  An alternative strategy, one that enriches for protein-coding genes, is to                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION
begin the cloning process by selecting only those DNA sequences that are tran-                  OF PLASMIDS
scribed into mRNA and thus correspond to protein-encoding genes. This is done                    INTO BACTERIA
by extracting the mRNA from cells and then making a DNA copy of each mRNA


Figure 8–29 Human genomic libraries containing DNA fragments that represent the whole
human genome can be constructed using restriction nucleases and DNA ligase. Such a
genomic library consists of a set of bacteria, each carrying a different fragment of human DNA. For
simplicity, only the colored DNA fragments are shown in the library; in reality, all of the different gray
fragments will also be represented.                                                           human genomic DNA library

=== Original PDF page 543 ===
504    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems





                                       LYSE CELLS AND
                                      PURIFY mRNA
                               tissue
                               (e.g., brain)

                     5′              mRNA                                             3′
                                           AAAAAAA

                            HYBRIDIZE WITH
                             POLY-T PRIMER
                    5′                                                                              3′
                                                 AA AA AA AA AA AA AA
                     MAKE COMPLEMENTARY DNA           TT TT TT TT TT TT TT
                        COPY WITH REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE     3′            5′             mRNA
                    5′                                                                              3′
                                                 AA AA AA AA AA AA AA
                   3′                                                 TT TT TT TT TT TT TT                                                                                                     5′              cDNA
                        DEGRADE RNA
                        WITH RNase H
                     5′                                                                              3′
                                                 AA AA AA AA AA AA AA
                   3′                                                 TT TT TT TT TT TT TT                                                                                                     5′

                           SYNTHESIZE A SECOND cDNA STRAND
                          USING DNA POLYMERASE;
                       RNA FRAGMENT ACTS AS PRIMER
                   5′                                                                               3′
                                                 A A A A A A A
                  3′                                                  T T T T T T T
                                                                                                     5′
                      double-strand cDNA copy of original mRNA

Figure 8–30 The synthesis of cDNA. Total mRNA is extracted from a particular tissue, and
the enzyme reverse transcriptase (see Figure 5–61) is used to produce DNA copies (cDNA)
of the mRNA molecules. For simplicity, the copying of just one of these mRNAs into cDNA is
illustrated. A short oligonucleotide complementary to the poly-A tail at the 3′ end of the mRNA
is first hybridized to the RNA to act as a primer for the reverse transcriptase, which then copies
the RNA into a complementary DNA chain, thereby forming a DNA–RNA hybrid helix. Treating the
DNA–RNA hybrid with a specialized ribonuclease (RNase H) that attacks only the RNA produces
nicks and gaps in the RNA strand. DNA polymerase then copies the remaining single-stranded
cDNA into double-stranded cDNA. Because DNA polymerase can synthesize through the bound
RNA molecules, the RNA fragment that is base-paired to the 3′ end of the first DNA strand usually
acts as the primer for the second strand synthesis, as shown. Any remaining RNA is eventually
degraded during subsequent cloning steps. As a result, the nucleotide sequences at the extreme
5′ ends of the original mRNA molecules are often absent from cDNA libraries.



molecule present—a so-called complementary DNA, or cDNA. The copying
reaction is catalyzed by the reverse transcriptase enzyme of retroviruses, which
synthesizes a complementary DNA chain on an RNA template. The single-strand
cDNA molecules synthesized by the reverse transcriptase are converted by
DNA polymerase into double-strand cDNA molecules, and these molecules are
inserted into a plasmid or virus vector and cloned (Figure 8–30). Each clone
obtained in this way is called a cDNA clone, and the entire collection of clones
derived from one mRNA preparation constitutes a cDNA library.
   The most important advantage of cDNA clones, over genomic clones, is that
they contain the uninterrupted coding sequence of a gene. When the aim of the
cloning is to produce the protein in large quantities by expressing the cloned gene
in a bacterial or other cell type, it is best to start with cDNA.
   Cloning DNA in bacteria revolutionized the study of genomes and is still in
wide use today. However, there is an even simpler way to clone DNA and produce

=== Original PDF page 544 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          505


                                                                                             Figure                                                                                         8–31                                                                            A                                                                                                   molecule                                                                                                                           of                                                                                 DNA                                                                                                          can                            II                         I
                    III                                                                                  undergo                                                                                                     denaturation                                                                                               and                                                                                                                           renaturation                                 I                                        I                    I                                                 I                                                           I                                            I                            I                                          I                 I                                          II                           I                              I                           II                                  I                                                                                                               For                                                                                                     two                                                                                                                                  single-strand                                                                                                          (hybridization).                                        I                                                I                                         I                                                         I                                                                    I I                       II slowly                        I                     I                    I                               heat                    I                                                              cool                                         II                        I                                                                                              molecules                                                                                                                     to                                                                                                                            hybridize,                                                                                                                          they                                                                                                           must                                                                                                                     have                    II                                           II                              I                                         II                        I                   I                     III                                                         III                         I                                                                                        complementary                                                                                                                     nucleotide                                                                                                             sequences                                                                                                                                                      that                  II                                           II                    II                   I                          II                      I                    I                     I                                                                                                       allow                                                                                                              base-pairing.                                                                                                                                             In                                                                                                                                                 this                                                                                                                   example,                                                                                                                                      the                                                                                                                                    red                         I                     I                                I                                           I                                                           I                                                         II                      II                             II                        I               IIII                            I                       I                                I                                                                                   and orange                                                                                                              strands                                                                                                                         are                                                                                                            complementary                                                                                                                                                  to                                              II                               I                            I                        I                     I                  II
                                                                                      each other, and the blue and green strands     DNA double helices             denaturation to                 renaturation restores
                                             single strands             DNA double helices             are complementary to each other. Although
                                (hydrogen bonds between         (nucleotide pairs re-formed)         denaturation by heating is shown, DNA can
                                    nucleotide pairs broken)                                             also be renatured after being denatured by
                                                                                                                                 alkali treatment.


genomic libraries, entirely in vitro. We discuss this approach, called the poly-
merase chain reaction, shortly. However, first we need to review a fundamental,
far-reaching property of DNA and RNA called hybridization.

Hybridization Provides a Powerful but Simple Way to Detect
Specific Nucleotide Sequences

Under normal conditions, the two strands of a DNA double helix are held together
by hydrogen bonds between the complementary base pairs (see Figure 4–3).
These relatively weak, noncovalent bonds are easy to break. Such DNA denatur-
ation releases the two strands from each other but does not break the covalent
bonds that link together the nucleotides within each strand. The simplest way to
achieve this separation is to heat the DNA to around 90°C. When the conditions
are reversed—by slowly lowering the temperature—the complementary strands
will readily come back together to re-form a double helix. This hybridization, or
DNA renaturation, is driven by the re-formation of the hydrogen bonds between
complementary base pairs (Figure 8-31).
   This fundamental capacity of a single-strand nucleic acid molecule, either
DNA or RNA, to form a double helix with a single-strand molecule of a comple-
mentary sequence provides a powerful and sensitive technique for detecting
specific nucleotide sequences. Today, one simply designs a short, single-strand
DNA molecule (often called a DNA probe) that is complementary to the nucleo-
tide sequence of interest. Because the nucleotide sequences of so many genomes
are known—and are stored in publicly accessible databases—designing a probe
to hybridize anywhere in a genome is straightforward. Probes are single-stranded,
typically 30 nucleotides in length, and are usually synthesized chemically by a
commercial service for pennies per nucleotide. A DNA sequence of 30 nucleo-
tides will occur by chance only once every 1 × 1018 nucleotides (430); so, even in
the human genome of 3 × 109 nucleotide pairs, a DNA probe designed to match a
unique 30-nucleotide sequence will be highly unlikely to hybridize—by chance—
anywhere else on the genome. The hybridization conditions can be set so that
even a single mismatch will prevent hybridization to “near-miss” sequences. The
exquisite specificity of nucleic acid hybridization can be easily appreciated by the
in situ (Latin for “in place”) hybridization experiment shown in Figure 8–32. As
we will see throughout this chapter, nucleic acid hybridization has many uses in



Figure 8–32 In situ hybridization can be used to locate genes on isolated chromosomes.
Here, six different DNA probes have been used to mark the locations of their complementary
nucleotide sequences on human chromosome 5, isolated from a mitotic cell in metaphase.
The DNA probes have been labeled with different chemical groups (see Figure 8–25B) and are
detected using fluorescent antibodies specific for those groups. The chromosomal DNA has
been partially denatured to allow the probes to base-pair with their complementary sequences.
Both the maternal and paternal copies of chromosome 5 are shown, aligned side by side. Each
probe produces two dots on each chromosome because chromosomes undergoing mitosis have
already replicated their DNA; therefore, each chromosome contains two identical DNA helices. The
technique employed here is nicknamed FISH, for fluorescence in situ hybridization. (Courtesy of
David C. Ward.)                                                                                                         2 µm

=== Original PDF page 545 ===
506    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


modern cell and molecular biology; one of the most powerful is in the cloning of
DNA by the polymerase chain reaction, as we next discuss.

Genes Can Be Cloned in Vitro Using PCR

Genomic and cDNA libraries were once the only route to cloning genes. However,
a powerful and versatile method for amplifying DNA, known as the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), provides a more rapid and straightforward approach to
DNA cloning, particularly in organisms whose complete genome sequence is
known. Today, because genome sequences are abundant, cloning is often carried
out by PCR.
   Invented in the 1980s, PCR revolutionized the way that DNA and RNA are
analyzed. The technique can amplify any nucleotide sequence selectively and is
performed entirely in a test tube. Eliminating the need for bacteria makes PCR
convenient and rapid—billions of copies of a nucleic acid sequence can be gener-
ated in a matter of hours. Starting with an entire genome, PCR allows DNA from
a specified region—selected by the experimenter—to be greatly amplified, effec-
tively purifying this DNA away from the remainder of the genome, which remains
unamplified. Because of its power to greatly amplify nucleic acids, PCR is remark-
ably sensitive: the method can be used to detect the trace amounts of DNA in a
drop of blood left at a crime scene or in a few copies of a viral genome in a sample
of someone’s saliva.
   The success of PCR depends both on the selectivity of DNA hybridization
and on the ability of DNA polymerase to copy a DNA template faithfully through
repeated rounds of replication in vitro. As discussed in Chapter 5, this enzyme
adds nucleotides to the 3′ end of a growing strand of DNA (see Figure 5–4). To
copy DNA, the polymerase requires a DNA primer—a short nucleotide sequence
that provides a 3′ end from which synthesis can begin. For PCR, the primers
are designed by the experimenter, synthesized chemically, and, by hybridizing
to genomic DNA, guide the polymerase to the part of the genome to copy. DNA
primers can be designed to uniquely locate any position on a genome.
  PCR is an iterative process in which the cycle of amplification is repeated
many times. At the start of each cycle, the two strands of the double-strand
DNA template are separated, and a different primer is annealed to each. These
primers mark the right and left boundaries of the DNA to be amplified. DNA poly-
merase is then allowed to replicate each strand independently (Figure 8–33). In
subsequent cycles, all the newly synthesized DNA molecules produced by the




                                                                                          STEP 3
                                                                 DNA SYNTHESIS
                         STEP 1                         STEP 2                                                           5′                       3′
                     HEAT TO                  COOL TO                                                          3′                    5′
                      SEPARATE                  ANNEAL                    + DNA polymerase
                     STRANDS                     PRIMERS                         + dATP                               products of5′                       3′                                                              + dGTP
3′                       5′                                                              + dCTP                                    ﬁrst cycle
       region of                                                                    + dTTP
   double-stranded                                                                                                                          5′                    3′
    DNA to be                                                                                                                         3′                       5′
      ampliﬁed                                                         pair of
                                                                    primers

                                                           FIRST CYCLE OF AMPLIFICATION

Figure 8–33 A pair of primers directs the synthesis of a desired segment of DNA in a test tube. Each cycle of PCR
includes three steps: (1) The double-stranded DNA is heated briefly to separate the two strands. (2) The DNA is exposed to a
large excess of a pair of specific primers—designed to bracket the region of DNA to be amplified—and the sample is cooled
to allow the primers to hybridize to complementary sequences in the two DNA strands. (3) This mixture is incubated with DNA
polymerase and the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates so that DNA can be synthesized, starting from the two primers.
To amplify the DNA, the cycle is repeated many times by reheating the sample to separate the newly synthesized DNA
strands (see Figure 8–34).
  The technique depends on the use of a special DNA polymerase isolated from a thermophilic bacterium; this polymerase is
stable at much higher temperatures than eukaryotic DNA polymerases, so it is not denatured by the heat treatment shown in
step 1. The enzyme therefore does not have to be added again after each cycle.

=== Original PDF page 546 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          507



                                                                HEAT TO
                                                                    SEPARATE
                                                                STRANDS
                 HEAT TO                                    AND
                 SEPARATE                                     COOL TO                   DNA
                STRANDS                DNA                  ANNEAL                      SYNTHESIS
                AND                     SYNTHESIS                 PRIMERS
               COOL TO
                ANNEAL
                  PRIMERS





    products of
    ﬁrst cycle





                                 SECOND CYCLE                                           THIRD CYCLE
     END OF                                    (produces four double-strand                                   (produces eight double-strand
     FIRST CYCLE                              DNA molecules)                                 DNA molecules)

Figure 8–34 PCR uses repeated rounds of strand separation, hybridization, and synthesis to amplify DNA. As the
procedure outlined in Figure 8–33 is repeated, all the newly synthesized fragments serve as templates in their turn. Because
the polymerase and the primers remain in the sample after the first cycle, PCR involves simply heating and then cooling the
same sample, in the same test tube, again and again. Each cycle doubles the amount of DNA synthesized in the previous
cycle, so that within a few cycles, the predominant DNA is identical to the sequence bracketed by and including the two
primers in the original template. In the example illustrated here, three cycles of reaction produce 16 DNA chains, 8 of which
(boxed in yellow) correspond exactly to one or the other strand of the original bracketed sequence. After four more cycles,
240 of the 256 DNA chains will correspond exactly to the original sequence, and after several more cycles, essentially all of
the DNA strands will be this length. Typically, 20–30 cycles are carried out to effectively clone a region of DNA starting from
genomic DNA; the rest of the genome remains unamplified, and its concentration is therefore negligible compared with that of
the amplified region (Movie 8.2).



polymerase serve as templates for the next round of replication (Figure 8–34).
Through this iterative amplification process, many copies of the original sequence
can be made—billions after about 20–30 cycles.
  PCR is now the method of choice for cloning relatively short DNA fragments
(say, under 10,000 nucleotide pairs). Each cycle takes only about 5 minutes, and
automation of the whole procedure enables cell-free cloning of a DNA fragment
in a few hours. The original template for PCR can be either DNA or RNA, so this
method can be used to obtain either a genomic clone (complete with introns and
exons) or a cDNA copy of an mRNA (Figure 8–35).

PCR Is Also Used for Diagnostic and Forensic Applications

The PCR method is extraordinarily sensitive; it can detect a single DNA mole-
cule in a sample if at least part of the sequence of that molecule is known. Trace
amounts of RNA can be analyzed in the same way by first transcribing them into
DNA with reverse transcriptase. For these reasons, PCR is frequently employed
for uses that go beyond simple cloning. For example, it can be used to detect
invading pathogens at very early stages of infection. In this case, short sequences
complementary to a segment of the infectious agent’s genome are used as prim-
ers, and, after many cycles of amplification, even a few copies of an invading
bacterial or viral genome in a human sample can be detected (Figure 8–36).
For many infections, PCR has replaced the use of antibodies against micro-
bial molecules to detect the presence of the invader. It is also used to verify the

=== Original PDF page 547 ===
508    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                              cells                                              Figure 8–35 PCR can be used to
                                                                                             obtain either genomic or cDNA clones.
                                                                                                                         (A) To use PCR to clone a segment of
                                                                                    chromosomal DNA, total genomic DNA
                                                                                                                                       is first purified from cells. PCR primers
                                                                                                             that flank the stretch of DNA to be cloned
                                                                                                     are added, and many cycles of PCR are                             isolate total DNA                 isolate total mRNA
        chromosomal                                                                      completed (see Figure 8–34). Because
      DNA                                                                                                       only the DNA between (and including) the
                                                    mRNA sequence           primers is amplified, PCR provides a way
                                                                             to be cloned               to obtain selectively any short stretch of
                                                                                    chromosomal DNA in an effectively pure
                                                                                                    form. (B) To use PCR to obtain a cDNA
                                                                                                 clone of a gene, total mRNA is first purified
              DNA segment to                                                             from cells. The first primer is added to
                    be cloned
                                               ADD FIRST PRIMER,                 the population of mRNAs, and reverse
                                                        REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE,               transcriptase is used to make a DNA
                                           AND DEOXYRIBONUCLEOSIDE            strand complementary to the specific RNA
              SEPARATE STRANDS                              TRIPHOSPHATES                sequence of interest. The second primer           AND ADD PRIMERS
                                                          DNA                   is then added, and the DNA molecule is
                                                                                                          amplified through many cycles of PCR.

                                                        mRNA

                                                       SEPARATE STRANDS AND
                                              ADD SECOND PRIMER





                                                        PCR AMPLIFICATION
              PCR AMPLIFICATION                     WITH BOTH PRIMERS PRESENT





    genomic                                    cDNA
      clones                                                  clones


    (A)                                                            (B)


authenticity of a food source; for example, whether a sample of beef actually came
from a cow.
    Finally, PCR is now widely used in forensics. The method’s extreme sensitivity
allows forensic investigators to isolate DNA from minute traces of human blood or
other tissue to obtain a DNA fingerprint of the person who left the sample behind.
With the possible exception of identical twins, the genome of each human differs
in DNA sequence from that of every other person on Earth. Using primer pairs     Figure 8–36 PCR can be used to detect
targeted at genome sequences that are known to be highly variable in the human     the presence of a viral genome in a
population, PCR makes it possible to generate a distinctive DNA fingerprint for     nasal sample. Because of its ability to
                                                                                                        amplify enormously the signal from a
any individual (Figure 8–37). Such forensic analyses can be used not only to help                                                                                                              single molecule of nucleic acid, PCR is
                                                                                     an extraordinarily sensitive method for
                                                                                                     detecting trace amounts of virus in a                                                                                             control, using
                                                                              sample from     sample of saliva, blood, or other tissue,
                                                                                  noninfected      without the need to purify the virus. For the
nasal sample           rare SARS-CoV-2            RNA                            person         coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the virus that
from infected          virus in sample from                                                  REVERSE                                causes COVID-19, the genome is a single-   person              infected person
                                    EXTRACT     TRANSCRIPTION          GEL              strand molecule of RNA, as illustrated
                                RNA       AND PCR          ELECTROPHORESIS       here. Typically, only a short segment of
                                                   AMPLIFICATION                             the viral genome (100–200 nucleotides) is
                                             OF SARS-CoV-2                                 amplified. Although it is possible to visualize
                                            cDNA
                                                                                                    the amplified DNA by gel electrophoresis
                                                                                          as shown here, it is usually detected by
                                                                                                        rapid optical methods described later in
                                                                                                    the chapter (see Figure 8–64). Many other
                                                                                                          viruses that infect humans—such as HIV—
                                                                                                     are detected using this strategy.

=== Original PDF page 548 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          509




 (A)   ANALYSIS OF ONE STR LOCUS IN A SINGLE INDIVIDUAL
                                                                    SEPARATE PCR PRODUCTS BY
                                                                      GEL ELECTROPHORESIS

                                       PCR
                                             primers
                           paternal
                   chromosome                                                       paternal
       homologous                 repeated sequences
      chromosomes                     at an STR locus                                maternal
                         maternal
                   chromosome





(B)  individual A                        individual B                          individual C                          forensic sample F




     STR 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        homologous
                                                                                                                     of     STR 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           chromosomes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pairs

                                                          3


     STR 3
            PCR                            PCR                         PCR                            PCR


                                                         GEL
                                                    ELECTROPHORESIS

                                        A     B     C      F

                                             35

                                             30

                                             25                                                                                                                                        repeats
                                       of 20

                                             15                                                                                                                     number

                                             10

                                              5

                                              0

Figure 8–37 PCR is used in forensic science to distinguish one individual from another. The DNA sequences analyzed are short tandem
repeats (STRs) composed of sequences such as CACACA... or GTGTGT.... STRs are found in various positions (loci) in the human genome. The
number of repeats in each STR locus is highly variable in the population, ranging from 4 to 40 in different individuals. Because of the variability in
these sequences, an individual will usually inherit a different number of repeats at each STR locus from his mother and from his father; two unrelated
individuals, therefore, rarely contain the same pair of sequences at a given STR locus. (A) PCR using primers that recognize unique sequences on
either side of one particular STR locus produces a pair of bands of amplified DNA from each individual, one band representing the maternal STR
variant and the other representing the paternal STR variant. The length of the amplified DNA, and thus its position after gel electrophoresis, will
depend on the exact number of repeats at the locus. (B) In the schematic example shown here, the same three STR loci are analyzed in samples
from three suspects (individuals A, B, and C), producing six bands for each individual. Although different people can have several bands in common,
the overall pattern is quite distinctive for each person. The band pattern can therefore serve as a DNA fingerprint to identify an individual nearly
uniquely. The fourth lane (F) contains the products of the same PCR amplifications carried out on a hypothetical forensic DNA sample, which could
have been obtained from a single hair or a tiny spot of blood left at a crime scene.
  The more loci that are examined, the more confident one can be about the results. When examining the variability at 5–10 different STR loci, the
odds that two random individuals would share the same fingerprint by chance are approximately 1 in 10 billion. In the case shown here, individuals A
and C can be eliminated from inquiries, while B is a clear suspect. A similar approach is used routinely in paternity testing.

=== Original PDF page 549 ===
510    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


identify those who have done wrong, but also—equally important—to exonerate
those who have been wrongfully accused.

PCR and Synthetic DNA Are Ideal Sources of Specific Gene
Sequences for Cloning

PCR is a powerful technique for producing large amounts of specific DNA
sequences in vitro. For many purposes—like those just described—there is no
need to insert the PCR product in a bacterial plasmid for further analysis. Certain
experiments, however, do require cloning of a specific DNA sequence in a plas-
mid for production in bacteria or other cells. Plasmids, for example, are important
for the production and biochemical analysis of specific proteins, as we discuss
later. In these cases, the desired DNA sequence can be readily produced by PCR
amplification. Restriction nuclease cleavage sites in the PCR product are then cut
to allow insertion into the appropriate plasmid as described earlier.
   In recent years, a method called Gibson assembly (named for its inven-
tor) has reduced the need for restriction nucleases in plasmid construction. A
circular plasmid is cut open with a restriction nuclease that leaves blunt ends.
In parallel, the desired DNA fragment is generated by PCR-mediated amplifi-
cation from a genomic or cDNA source (see Figure 8–35). Importantly, the PCR
primers are designed so that the ends of the PCR product contain 15–40 base
pairs of the same sequence that surrounds the cut site in the plasmid. The PCR
product and plasmid are then treated with a 5′ exonuclease that degrades just
one DNA strand at the ends of all DNA molecules, leaving single-strand sticky
ends on the PCR product that will hybridize to complementary DNA on the
plasmid (Figure 8–38). DNA polymerase then fills in the gaps, and DNA ligase
joins the DNA strands. The resulting product is introduced into bacteria or other
cell types as desired. This method can also be used to join a series of DNA frag-
ments in a single plasmid. Each end of a DNA fragment must share sequence
with the end of the fragment to which it will be joined. After treatment with 5′
exonuclease, all the complementary sticky ends find each other and are thereby
assembled in the correct order in the plasmid. Large genes can be assembled in
this way from multiple subfragments.
   Another key advance in recent years resulted from the rapid decline in the
cost of methods for the chemical synthesis of DNA. Short single-strand DNA


                                                                     circular plasmid
                  cDNA
                                                                                             Figure 8–38 DNA cloning by Gibson
                                                                                        assembly. It is often useful to insert a DNA
                       PCR with extended                          restriction                        fragment in a circular bacterial plasmid,
                           primers carrying                         nuclease                                                                                          as described earlier (see Figure 8–26).                          plasmid sequence                        3′     5′
                   5′                       3′                                5′     3′                                      In Gibson assembly, as shown here, a
                   3′                       5′                                                            plasmid is cleaved at a specific site with
                 PCR product
                                                                                       a restriction nuclease. In parallel, the
                                 5′ exonuclease                                 5′ exonuclease              DNA sequence to be cloned is amplified
                                                                              3′        5′                          by PCR of a cDNA or other source. In                                                                           5′        3′                                  addition to sequences complementary to                      5′                    3′                   3′                   5′                                                                   the ends of the DNA to be amplified, the
                                                                   PCR primers include 15–40 nucleotides of
                                                                                      sequence that matches the sequence on
                                                                                                                  either side of the cut site in the linearized
                                    HYBRIDIZE                                                   plasmid. The PCR product and plasmid
                                                                                                     are treated with a 5′ exonuclease, which
                                                                                                                             partially digests the DNA from the 5′ end,
                                                                                                                 resulting in single-strand 3′ overhangs.
                                                                                      These single-strand overhangs hybridize
                                DNA polymerase                                        with their complementary sequence, neatly
                                DNA ligase                                                  inserting the PCR product in the plasmid as
                                                                                      shown. DNA polymerase is then added to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fill in any gaps in the sequence, and DNA
                                                                                                              ligase seals the nicks to provide the fully
                                  assembled plasmid                                         assembled plasmid.

=== Original PDF page 550 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          511


molecules, called oligonucleotides, are cheap to make and have been used for
decades as probes and primers for PCR and other methods. Recently, it has
become possible to cheaply synthesize much larger double-strand DNA mole-
cules up to a few thousand base pairs in length. Thus, for many purposes, it is
easier to order the desired DNA fragment from a DNA synthesis company than
it is to produce it by PCR. If the ends of the synthetic DNA fragment are iden-
tical to those of a cut plasmid, then it is straightforward to insert the synthetic
DNA in a plasmid by Gibson assembly (see Figure 8–38). Using multiple syn-
thetic DNA fragments with interlocking ends, it is possible to assemble very
large stretches of DNA (approaching the size of small genomes) from purely
synthetic DNA.
  We will see later in this chapter that the study of gene and protein function
often requires methods to produce a mutant gene or protein that carries specific
point mutations that alter its function. In molecular biology, the production of
a mutant DNA sequence, called site-directed mutagenesis, is readily achieved
through the clever application of PCR and synthetic DNA. If the goal is a single
point mutation, then one of the two PCR primers can be designed to include the
mutation while still having sufficient flanking sequence to hybridize to the non-
mutant source DNA. PCR then generates a DNA product with the mutation near
one end. This mutant DNA fragment can be assembled in a plasmid with other
portions of the gene. If multiple mutations in a DNA sequence are needed, then
the simplest approach is to purchase a synthetic DNA containing the mutations
and insert that into the desired plasmid.

DNA Cloning Allows Any Protein to Be Produced in Large
Amounts

Using the genetic code (and assuming all intron and exon boundaries are known),
the amino acid sequence of any protein coded in a genome can be deduced. As
was discussed earlier, this sequence can often provide an important clue to the
protein’s function if found to be similar to the amino acid sequence of a protein                   expression vector
that has already been studied (see Figure 8–22). Although this strategy is often suc-
cessful, it typically provides only the likely biochemical function of the protein; for
example, whether the protein resembles a kinase or a protease. It usually remains
for the experimenter to verify (or refute) this assignment and, most important, to       promoter                                                                                                  sequence
discover the protein’s biological function in the whole organism.                                CUT DNA WITH
                                                                                                    RESTRICTION NUCLEASE
  An important approach in determining gene function is to alter the gene (or in
some cases, its expression pattern), place the altered copy back into the organism,
and deduce the function of the normal gene by the changes caused by its alter-
ation. Various techniques to implement this strategy are discussed in the next
                                                                                                             INSERT PROTEIN-
section of this chapter. But it is equally important to study the biochemical and         CODING DNA SEQUENCE
structural properties of a gene product, as outlined earlier in this chapter. One
of the most important contributions of DNA cloning to cell and molecular biol-
ogy is the ability to produce any protein, even the rare ones, in nearly unlimited
amounts. Such high-level production is usually carried out in living cells using
expression vectors (Figure 8–39). These are generally plasmids that have been
designed to produce a large amount of stable mRNA that can be efficiently trans-                   INTRODUCE
                                                                                        RECOMBINANT DNA
lated into protein when the plasmid is introduced into bacterial, yeast, insect, or                    INTO CELLS


Figure 8–39 Production of large amounts of a protein from a protein-coding DNA sequence
cloned into an expression vector and introduced into cells. A plasmid vector has been
engineered to contain a highly active promoter, which causes unusually large amounts of mRNA
to be produced from an adjacent protein-coding gene inserted into the plasmid vector. Depending
on the characteristics of the cloning vector, the plasmid is introduced into bacterial, yeast, insect,
or mammalian cells, where the inserted gene is efficiently transcribed and translated into protein. If
the gene to be overexpressed has no introns (typical for genes from bacteria, archaea, and simple
eukaryotes), it can simply be cloned from genomic DNA by PCR. For cloned animal and plant
genes, it is often more convenient to obtain the gene as cDNA, either from a cDNA library (see
Figure 8–30) or cloned directly by PCR from RNA isolated from the organism (see Figure 8–35).              overexpressed      overexpressed
                                                                           mRNA             proteinAlternatively, the DNA coding for the protein can be made by chemical synthesis.

=== Original PDF page 551 ===
512    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


Figure 8–40 Production of large amounts of a protein by using a plasmid expression vector.                         time at
In this example, an expression vector that overproduces a DNA helicase has been introduced into                         42°C
                                                                                                        25°Cbacteria. In this expression vector, transcription from this coding sequence is under the control of
a viral promoter that becomes active only at a temperature of 37°C or higher. The total cell protein,
either from bacteria grown at 25°C (no helicase protein made) or after a shift of the same bacteria
to 42°C for up to 2 hours (helicase protein has become the most abundant protein species in the
lysate), has been analyzed by SDS polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis. (Courtesy of Kevin Hacker.)


                                                                                              DNA
mammalian cells. To prevent the high level of the foreign protein from interfering                                         helicase
with the cell’s growth, the expression vector is often designed to delay the synthe-
sis of the foreign mRNA and protein until shortly before the cells are harvested
and lysed (Figure 8–40).
   Because the desired protein made from an expression vector is produced                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              electrophoresisinside a cell, it must be purified away from the host-cell proteins by chromatog-
raphy after cell lysis. However, because the protein is such a plentiful species       of
in the cell (often 1–10% of the total cell protein), the purification is usually easyto accomplish in only a few steps. As we saw earlier, it is also possible to fuse a                               direction
molecular tag—a cluster of histidine residues or a small marker protein—to the
expressed protein to facilitate easy purification by affinity chromatography (see
Figure 8–11). A variety of expression vectors is available, each engineered to
function in the type of cell in which the protein is to be made.
   This technology is also used to make large amounts of many medically use-
ful proteins, including hormones (such as insulin and growth factors) used as
pharmaceuticals, and viral proteins for use in vaccines. Expression vectors also
allow scientists to produce many proteins of biological interest in large enough
amounts for detailed structural studies. Nearly all three-dimensional protein
structures depicted in this book are of proteins produced in this way. Recom-
binant DNA techniques thus allow scientists to move with ease from protein to
gene, and vice versa, so that the functions of both can be explored on multiple
fronts (Figure 8–41).

DNA Can Be Sequenced Rapidly by Dideoxy Sequencing

Most current methods of manipulating DNA, RNA, and proteins rely on prior
knowledge of the nucleotide sequence of the genome of interest. But how are
these sequences determined in the first place? In the late 1970s, researchers
developed several strategies for determining the nucleotide sequence of any
purified DNA fragment. The method that became the most widely used is called
dideoxy sequencing or Sanger sequencing (named after the scientist who



                            DETERMINE AMINO ACID           SEARCH DNA          SYNTHESIZE
                        SEQUENCE OF A PEPTIDE FRAGMENT     DATABASE FOR       DNA PRIMERS
                            USING MASS SPECTROMETRY       GENE SEQUENCE    AND CLONE BY PCR


 STRUCTURAL AND BIOCHEMICAL                                                                         MANIPULATE AND
   ANALYSES TO DETERMINE                                                                               INTRODUCE
     THREE-DIMENSIONAL                                                                                ALTERED GENE INTO
    CONFORMATION AND                                                                                         CELLS OR ORGANISM
                                                 PROTEIN                      GENE or cDNA           ACTIVITY                                                                           TO STUDY FUNCTION



                                  OVEREXPRESS        INTRODUCE INTO         INSERT PROTEIN-CODING
                            AND PURIFY             E. coli OR OTHER         REGION OF GENE INTO
                                     PROTEIN            HOST CELL             EXPRESSION VECTOR

Figure 8–41 Recombinant DNA techniques make it possible to move experimentally from gene to protein and from
protein to gene. If a gene has been identified (right), its protein-coding sequence can be inserted into an expression vector to
produce large quantities of the protein (see Figure 8–39), which can then be studied biochemically or structurally. If a protein
has been purified on the basis of its biochemical properties, mass spectrometry (see Figure 8–18) can be used to obtain a
partial amino acid sequence, which is used to search a genome sequence for the corresponding nucleotide sequence. The
complete gene can then be cloned by PCR from a sequenced genome (see Figure 8–35). The gene can also be manipulated
and introduced into cells or organisms to study its function, a topic covered in the next section of this chapter.

=== Original PDF page 552 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          513




                                    base                                  base
                               5′                                            5′
           P P P  O  CH2 O                P P P  O  CH2 O

                3′ OH allows                                   3′ H prevents
                strand       3′                           strand        3′
             extension at   OH                    extension at
                    3′ end                                           3′ end

           normal deoxyribonucleoside         chain-terminating dideoxyribonucleoside
                triphosphate (dNTP)                      triphosphate (ddNTP)

Figure 8–42 The dideoxy method of sequencing DNA relies on chain-terminating
dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs). These ddNTPs are derivatives of the normal
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) that lack the 3′-hydroxyl group. When incorporated
into a growing DNA strand, they block further elongation of that strand.

invented it). This method uses DNA polymerase, along with special chain-termi-
nating nucleotides called dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (Figure 8–42).
Dideoxy sequencing reactions produce a collection of different DNA copies that
terminate at every position in the original DNA sequence. In the original form
of the method, four separate sequencing reactions were performed, each with a
different dideoxyribonucleotide; the DNA copies were labeled with radioactivity
and separated on polyacrylamide gels, which were then exposed to film to pro-
duce four ladders of bands that were read manually to reveal the sequence (see
Figure 8–24C). This laborious method was replaced, beginning in the late 1980s,
with technologies that are simpler, safer, and fully automated: robotic devices mix
the reagents—including the four different chain-terminating dideoxyribonucleo-
tides, each tagged with a different-colored fluorescent dye—and load the reaction
samples onto long, thin capillary gels, which separate the reaction products into
a series of distinct bands. A detector then records the color of each band, and a
computer translates the information into a nucleotide sequence (Figure 8–43).


                   single-strand DNA fragment
                       to be sequenced
                    3′ TAGTGTCACCTAAAT  5′

                      ADD PRIMER                                                      Figure 8–43 Automated dideoxy
                                                                                    sequencing relies on a set of four
             ATCA                                                            ddNTPs, each bearing a uniquely
                                                                                          colored fluorescent tag. (A) To determine
             TAGTGTCACCTAAAT                                                                                                    the complete sequence of a single-strand
    ADD SMALL                                    ADD                                                  EXCESS                               A                                  T                                                                                              fragment                                                                                                                         of DNA                                                                                                                                           (gray),                                                                                                                           the                                                                                     DNA                                                                                                                                                                                  is                             A                                C                                   C                                          T   AMOUNTS            OF  T                                    AMOUNTS                                                OF                          G               A                              C                               G                            G                                                                                                                                                   first                                                                                                           hybridized                                                                                                                     with                                                                                                       a                                                                                                                            short                                                                                    DNA                                                                                                                                 primer                                      T                                 G                                   T                 C   LABELED           CHAIN-                                         UNLABELED                                        T                         A                G                            A                                         T                                                                                                           (orange).                                                                                           The                                                                            DNA                                                                                                                                                                is                                                                                                                   then                                                                                                             mixed                                                                                                                                       with                                                                                           DNA    TERMINATING              G C CAA        dNTPs       ddNTPs                                                                              polymerase (not shown), an excess amount
                                                                                                               of normal dNTPs, and a mixture containing
                                                                                                      small amounts of all four chain-terminating              ATCACA
                                                                                   ddNTPs, each of which is labeled with                                PRODUCTS LOADED     direction of
                                                                                       a fluorescent tag of a different color.          ATCACAGT                             ONTO CAPILLARY      electrophoresis                    ATCAC                                        GEL                                          Because the chain-terminating ddNTPs will
           ATCACAG                                                              be incorporated only occasionally, each
                 ATCACAGTG                                                                  reaction produces a diverse set of DNA
                                                                                               copies that terminate at different points in
            mixture of DNA products, each                                 size-separated products                                                                                                    the sequence. The reaction products are            containing a chain-terminating                                  are read in sequence
          ddNTP labeled with a speciﬁc                                                         loaded onto a long, thin capillary gel and
            ﬂuorescent marker                                                                   separated by electrophoresis. A camera
             (A)                                                                                reads the color of each band on the gel
                                                                                   and feeds the data to a computer that
                                                                                        assembles the sequence (not shown).
                                                                                    The sequence read from the gel will be
                                                                                        complementary to the sequence of the
                                                                                                                       original DNA molecule. (B) A tiny part of the
                                                                                              data from such an automated sequencing
           T T C T A T AG T G T C A C C T AAATA G C T T GG C G T AATC A T G G T                            run. Each colored peak represents a
              (B)                                                                                       nucleotide in the DNA sequence.

=== Original PDF page 553 ===
514    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems

Next-Generation Sequencing Methods Have Revolutionized DNA
and RNA Analysis

Automated dideoxy sequencing was used in the late 1990s and early 2000s
to determine the nucleotide sequences of many genomes, including those of
E. coli, yeast, fruit flies, nematode worms, and humans. It continues to be used
today as a low-cost approach to small-scale sequencing. But newer methods,
developed since 2005, are now used for most large-scale genomic analysis. With
these so-called second-generation sequencing technologies, the cost of sequenc-
ing DNA has decreased dramatically, and the number of sequenced genomes
has increased enormously. These rapid methods allow multiple genomes to be
sequenced in a matter of weeks, enabling investigators to examine thousands of
individual human genomes, catalog the variation in nucleotide sequences from
people around the world, and uncover the mutations that increase the risk of vari­
ous diseases, from cancer to autism. These methods have also made it possible
to determine the genome sequence of extinct species, including Neanderthal
man and the woolly mammoth (Movie 8.3). By sequencing genomes from many
closely related species, they have also helped us understand the molecular basis
of key evolutionary events in the tree of life. The ability to rapidly sequence DNA
has had major effects on all branches of biology, agriculture, and medicine; it is
almost impossible to imagine where we would be without it.
   Several second-generation sequencing methods are now in wide use. The
most common is Illumina sequencing, named for the company that manufac-
tures the equipment and reagents. This approach begins with the construction
of libraries of small DNA fragments that represent the DNA of the entire genome.
Instead of using bacterial cells to generate these libraries, they are made using
PCR amplification of billions of DNA fragments, each attached to the glass sur-
face of a flow cell. The amplification is carried out so that the PCR-generated
copies of an original DNA fragment, instead of floating away in solution, remain
bound in proximity to that original DNA fragment—resulting in a cluster of about
1000 identical copies of that small bit of the genome. These clusters—a billion of
which can fit in a single flow cell—are then sequenced at the same time; that is,
in parallel.
   Sequencing is achieved using chain-terminating nucleotides with uniquely
colored fluorescent tags. Unlike conventional dideoxy sequencing, however, the
fluorescent tag and the chemical group that blocks elongation are both remov-
able. Once DNA polymerase has added the fluorescent, chain-terminating
nucleotide, a photo of the reaction records the color to reveal the identity of
the nucleotide that was added. The colored label and the chain-terminating
group are then removed, allowing DNA polymerase to add the next nucleotide
(Figure 8–44). This cycle is repeated hundreds of times to provide the sequence
of the DNA in each cluster. Billions of these clusters are sequenced in parallel.
The full genome sequence is then reconstructed in the computer by stitching
together the sequences of all fragments, using the overlaps between fragments
as a guide.
   Illumina sequencing provides short DNA sequences of a few hundred nucle-
otides, which can sometimes be difficult to assemble into a complete genome
sequence because of the many repeated sequences that are often found in
genomes. Recently developed third-generation sequencing methods are capable of
sequencing much longer DNA molecules. Two methods are particularly promis-
ing. The first is single-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing, which is carried out
in an array of tiny wells, each containing a single DNA polymerase anchored to its
bottom surface. The key to SMRT sequencing is that it uses deoxyribonucleoside
triphosphates in which the fluorescent dye is attached to the terminal phosphate.
As the DNA polymerase copies the template DNA, the binding of a fluorescent
nucleotide generates a color signal that reveals its identity. The signal disappears
when the fluorescent terminal phosphate is released during incorporation of the
nucleotide into the growing DNA chain (see Figure 5–4). The sequence of the
DNA is thus revealed by the colors of the brief fluorescent pulses that appear as

=== Original PDF page 554 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          515



     (A)                                                                                              (B)
                   each location on slide or
                     plate contains ~1000 copies
                    of a unique DNA molecule
                    to be sequenced



                   DNA template molecule
                           to be sequenced

    CGTATACAGTCAGGT
    GCAT primer               DNA
                                   template             5′
        + DNA polymerase
STEP 1  + ﬂuorescent, reversible                   A
           terminator NTPs
                                              P                                                              100 µm
                                                          added A
    CGTATACAGTCAGGT                                         recorded
                                                                                             Figure 8–44 Principles of Illumina    GCAT A
                                                                 3′ block                                     sequencing. (A) A genome or other large
                                                                   DNA sample is broken into millions of short
        FLUORESCENT TAG AND
STEP 2  TERMINATOR REMOVED                                                                   fragments. These fragments are attached
       FROM A                                                                                        to the surface of a flow cell and amplified                                                                      5′                                                                                       by PCR to generate DNA clusters, each
    CGTATACAGTCAGGT                                                                             containing about a thousand copies of a
                                         A                                             single DNA fragment. The large number    GCAT A
                                              P                                                      of clusters provides complete coverage of
        + DNA polymerase                                      next                                the genome. In the first step, the anchored
STEP 1  + ﬂuorescent, reversible                                      cycle                     DNA clusters are incubated with DNA
           terminator NTPs                  OH                                        polymerase and a special set of all four
                                                     free 3′ end                                        nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs), each
    CGTATACAGTCAGGT                                                                              with two reversible chemical modifications:
    GCAT AT                                                                            a uniquely colored fluorescent marker
                                                                                   and a 3′ chemical group that terminates                                                                      5′                                                                   DNA synthesis. Normal dNTPs are not
                                                                                                       present. After a nucleotide is added
     STEPS 1 AND 2                                  T                                    by DNA polymerase, a high-resolution
    REPEATED UNTIL                           P                                                              digital camera records the color of the
    SEQUENCE IS COMPLETE                                  added T                           fluorescence at each DNA cluster. In
                                                                 recorded                          the second step, the DNA is chemically
                                                                                                        treated to remove the fluorescent markers
                                                                 3′ block                                                                                   and chemical blockers. A new batch of
                                                                                                            fluorescent, reversible terminator NTPs is
each nucleotide binds (Figure 8–45). Because very long DNA fragments (tens of     then added to initiate another round of DNA
kilobases) can be read by this method, and tens of thousands of reactions can     synthesis. These steps are repeated until
                                                                                                    the sequence is complete. The snapshots
be analyzed in parallel, complete genome sequences are well within reach in                                                                                                               of each round of synthesis are compiled
a short period of time. It is also possible to use circular DNA templates that are    by computer to yield the sequence of
sequenced repeatedly on both strands, greatly improving the accuracy of the    each DNA fragment. The sequence of the
resulting sequence (see Figure 8–45C).                                                              millions of overlapping DNA fragments can
   Another third-generation sequencing method, called nanopore sequencing,     then be used to reconstruct the complete
                                                                             genome sequence. (B) An image of the
does not require DNA synthesis at all, but instead involves the transport of a                                                                                                    surface of the Illumina flow cell, showing
single-strand DNA molecule through a tiny protein pore in a membrane. Volt-      individual DNA clusters after a round
age is applied across the membrane, resulting in current through the pore. The      of DNA synthesis with colored NTPs.
passage of nucleotides through the pore generates tiny shifts in electric current      (B, courtesy of Illumina, Inc.)
across the membrane, and the unique shape of each nucleotide base results in
a slightly different disruption of the current. Measurement of these tiny current
changes reveals the identity of each nucleotide as it passes through the pore.
As in SMRT sequencing, extremely long DNAs can be sequenced in this man-
ner. Another advantage is that modified nucleotides (such as 5-methylcytosine,
depicted in Figure 7–46) can be identified because their effect on the current
differs slightly from that of the unmodified nucleotide. Efforts are under way to
allow direct sequencing of RNA by this approach as well. A major advantage of
this method is that it can be performed with portable, handheld instruments that
can be taken into the field, opening up exciting possibilities for DNA and RNA
sequence analysis in global health and biology.
   The development of cheaper and faster DNA sequencing methods has led to
vast improvements in our ability to obtain and analyze genomic information. The

=== Original PDF page 555 ===
516    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems



               microwells
                                                              C              G
                        A  ﬂuorescent
                            C
                        G  deoxyribonucleoside                               T  triphosphates                                                 intensity
                                                                                                time                                                                          (B)
                        DNA template
                        DNA polymerase
                                                                   hairpin                                          hairpin
                                                           adaptor   DNA fragment to be sequenced     adaptor

                                                 primer
                       50 nm

          excitation and
                                                                             direction of sequencing     ﬂuorescence detection                   DNA
                                                polymerase
(A)                                                     (C)

Figure 8–45 Single-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing. (A) SMRT sequencing uses a flow cell with thousands of tiny
wells, each containing a single DNA polymerase, a single DNA template, and four fluorescently tagged deoxyribonucleoside
triphosphates. Initial binding of a nucleotide to the template generates a local fluorescent signal that disappears when the
terminal phosphates are removed during incorporation of the nucleotide into the DNA. To reduce background fluorescence
from unbound nucleotides, only the bottom 30 nm of the well is illuminated, so that fluorescence is detected in a tiny volume
(20 zeptoliters, or 20 × 10–21 liters). (B) Detection of fluorescent signals in the well reveals transient pulses of a single color,
indicating the nucleotide that has been incorporated. (C) SMRT sequencing is often performed with a circular DNA template
that is constructed by attaching hairpin adaptor DNAs to each end of the DNA to be sequenced. Using a primer that matches
the adaptor, DNA polymerase can then replicate the template as shown in panel A. The enzyme used in this method is a
strand-displacing polymerase that separates double-stranded DNA as it moves along the template, allowing it to continue
around the entire circular molecule many times. Thus, both strands of the DNA are repeatedly sequenced, allowing the
experimenter to eliminate sequence errors that arise from random mistakes made by the polymerase.


original “reference” sequence of the human genome, completed in 2003, cost
more than $1 billion and required many scientists from around the world working
together for 13 years. The enormous progress made in the past 15 years has made
it possible for a single person to complete the sequence of an individual human
genome in less than a day, at a cost of less than $1000.
   As mentioned above, next-generation sequencing methods are being devel-
oped for the direct sequencing of RNA. Currently, however, RNA sequencing is
typically carried out by converting the RNA to cDNA (using reverse transcriptase)
and using one of the methods described above for DNA sequencing. It is impor-
tant to keep in mind that although genomes remain the same from cell to cell and
from tissue to tissue, the RNA produced from the genome can vary enormously.
We will see later in this chapter that sequencing the entire repertoire of RNA from
a cell or tissue (known as deep RNA sequencing, or RNA-seq) is a powerful way
to understand how the information present in the genome is used by different
cells under different circumstances. RNA-seq is also a valuable tool for annotating
genomes, as we discuss next.

To Be Useful, Genome Sequences Must Be Annotated

Long strings of nucleotides, at first glance, reveal nothing about how this genetic
information directs the development of a living organism—or even what types
of DNA, protein, and RNA molecules are produced by a genome. The process of
genome annotation attempts to mark out all the genes (both protein-coding and
noncoding) in a genome and ascribe a role to each. It also seeks to understand
more subtle types of genome information, such as the cis-regulatory sequences
that specify the time and place that a given gene is expressed and whether its
mRNA undergoes alternative splicing to produce different protein isotypes.
Clearly, this is a daunting task, and we are far short of completing it for any form of
life, even the simplest bacterium. For many organisms, we know the approximate
number of genes, and, for very simple organisms, we understand the functions of
about half their genes.
  How does one begin to make sense of a genome sequence? The first step is
usually to translate in silico the entire genome into protein. There are six different

=== Original PDF page 556 ===
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                                                          517



(A)              reading direction for sequence of top DNA strand

         3      N-   ile   leu  phe  arg   val    ile  arg  pro        thr  arg  asn  phe  thr       arg  -C
 reading  2     N-  tyr  phe   ile   ser   ser  asn   ser   thr  leu  asn  ala   lys   leu   his   leu  thr  -C
 frames         1   N-  leu  phe  tyr  phe  glu      phe  asp  leu   lys  arg  glu  thr   ser  leu  asn  -C

            5′     T T A T T T T A T T T C GAG T AA T T C GA C C T T AAA C G C GAAA C T T C A C T T AA C       3′DNA
            3′   AA T AAAA T AAAG C T C A T T AAG C T GGAA T T T G C G C T T T GAAG T GAA T T G       5′

         –1  C-         lys    ile   glu  leu  leu  glu   val   lys  phe  ala  phe  ser          lys   val  -N
 reading  –2    C-   ile    lys  asn  arg  thr    ile  arg  gly         val  arg  phe   lys   val       arg  -N
 frames
         –3      C-  asn          lys   ser   thr  asn   ser  arg  leu  arg   ser   val  glu   ser  leu   ser  -N

                         reading direction for sequence of bottom DNA strand



(B)         reading direction for sequence of top DNA strand
         3
reading
frames   2
         1
DNA 5′                                                                                                                   3′       3′                                                                                                                   5′
         –1
reading
frames   –2
         –3
                reading direction for sequence of bottom DNA strand
                                                                    500 base pairs

Figure 8–46 Finding the regions in a DNA sequence that encode a protein. (A) Any region of
the DNA sequence can, in principle, code for six different amino acid sequences, because any one
of three different reading frames can be used to interpret the nucleotide sequence on each strand.
Note that a nucleotide sequence is always read in the 5′-to-3′ direction and encodes a polypeptide
from the N-terminus to the C-terminus. For a random nucleotide sequence read in a particular
frame, a stop signal for protein synthesis is encountered, on average, about once every 20 amino
acids. In this sample sequence of 48 base pairs, each such signal (stop codon) is colored blue,
and only reading frame 2 lacks a stop signal. (B) Search of a 1700-base-pair DNA sequence for
a possible protein-encoding sequence. The information is displayed as in panel A, with each stop
signal for protein synthesis denoted by a blue line. In addition, all of the regions between possible
start and stop signals for protein synthesis are displayed as red bars. Only reading frame 1 actually
encodes a protein, which is 475 amino acid residues long.



reading frames for any piece of double-stranded DNA (three on each strand). We
saw in Chapter 6 that a random sequence of nucleotides, read in frame, will con-
tain a stop codon about every 20 amino acids. In contrast, protein-coding regions
will usually contain much longer stretches without stop codons (Figure 8–46).
Known as open reading frames (ORFs), these usually signify bona fide protein-
coding genes. This assignment is often “double-checked” by comparing the ORF
amino acid sequence to the many databases of documented proteins from other
species. If a match is found, even an imperfect one, it is very likely that the ORF
will code for a functional protein (see Figure 8–22).
   This strategy works very well for compact genomes, where intron sequences
are rare and ORFs often extend for many hundreds of amino acids. However,
in many animals and plants, the average exon size is 150–200 nucleotide pairs,
and additional information is usually required to unambiguously locate all the
exons of a gene. Although it is possible to search genomes for splicing signals and
other features that help to identify exons (codon bias, for example), one of the
most powerful methods is simply to sequence the total RNA produced from the
genome in living cells. As can be seen in Figure 7–3, this RNA-seq information,
when mapped onto the genome sequence, can be used to accurately locate all the
introns and exons of even complex genes. By sequencing total RNA from different
cell types, it is also possible to identify cases of alternative splicing.
   RNA-seq also identifies noncoding RNAs produced by a genome. Although
the function of some of them can be readily recognized (tRNAs or snoRNAs, for
example), many have unknown functions and still others probably have no func-
tion at all. The existence of the many noncoding RNAs and our relative ignorance

=== Original PDF page 557 ===
518    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


of their function is the main reason that we know only the approximate number
of genes in the human genome.
   But even for protein-coding genes that have been unambiguously identified,
we still have much to learn. Thousands of genomes have been sequenced, and we
know from comparative genomics that many organisms share the same basic set
of proteins. However, the functions of a very large number of identified proteins
remain unknown. Depending on the organism, approximately one-third of the
proteins encoded by a sequenced genome do not clearly resemble any protein
that has been studied biochemically. This observation underscores a limitation of
the emerging field of genomics: although comparative analysis of genomes reveals
a great deal of information about the relationships between genes and organisms,
it often does not provide immediate information about how these genes function
or what roles they have in the physiology of an organism. Comparison of the full
gene complement of several thermophilic bacteria, for example, does not reveal
why these bacteria thrive at temperatures exceeding 70°C. And examination of
the genome of the incredibly radiation-resistant bacterium Deinococcus radio-
durans does not explain how this organism can survive a blast of radiation that
can shatter glass. Further biochemical and genetic studies, like those described in
the other sections of this chapter, are required to determine how genes, and the
proteins they produce, function in the context of living organisms.

Summary

DNA cloning allows a copy of any specific part of a DNA or RNA sequence to be
selected from the millions of other sequences in a cell and produced in unlimited
amounts in pure form. DNA sequences can be amplified by inserting the desired
DNA fragment into a self-replicating genetic element such as a bacterial plas-
mid. Bypassing cloning vectors and bacterial cells altogether, the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) allows DNA cloning to be performed directly with a DNA
polymerase and DNA primers—provided that the DNA sequence of interest is
already known.
   The procedures used to obtain DNA clones that correspond in sequence to
mRNA molecules are the same, except that a DNA copy of the mRNA sequence,
called cDNA, is first made. Unlike genomic DNA clones, cDNA clones lack intron
sequences, making them the clones of choice for analyzing the protein product of a
gene.
   Nucleic acid hybridization reactions provide a sensitive means of detecting
any nucleotide sequence of interest. The enormous specificity of this hybridiza-
tion reaction allows any single-strand sequence of nucleotides to be labeled with
a radioisotope or chemical and used as a probe to find a complementary partner
strand, even in a cell or cell extract that contains millions of different DNA and RNA
sequences. DNA hybridization also makes it possible to use PCR to amplify any
section of any genome once its sequence is known.
   The nucleotide sequence of any genome can be determined rapidly and simply
by using highly automated techniques that are based on several different strategies.
Comparison of the genome sequences of different organisms allows us to trace the
evolutionary relationships among genes and organisms, and it has proved valu-
able for discovering new genes and predicting their functions.

STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION
Ultimately, our goal is to understand how genes—and the proteins they encode—
function in the intact organism. Although it may seem counterintuitive, one of the
most direct ways to find out what a gene does is to see what happens to the organ-
ism when that gene is missing. Studying mutant organisms that have acquired
changes or deletions in their nucleotide sequences is a time-honored practice
in biology and forms the basis of the important field of genetics. Because muta-
tions can disrupt cell processes, mutants often hold the key to understanding
gene function. In the classical genetic approach, one begins by isolating mutants

=== Original PDF page 558 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  519


that have an interesting or unusual appearance: fruit flies with white eyes or curly
wings, for example. Working backward from the phenotype—the appearance or
behavior of the individual—one then determines the organism’s genotype, the
form of the gene responsible for that characteristic (Panel 8–1).
   Today, with numerous genome sequences available, the exploration of gene
function often begins with a DNA sequence. Here, the challenge is to translate
sequence into function. One approach, discussed earlier in the chapter, is to
search databases for well-characterized proteins that have similar amino acid
sequences to the protein encoded by a new gene. From there, the protein can be
overexpressed and purified, and the methods described earlier in this chapter can
be employed to study its biochemical properties and three-dimensional struc-
ture. But to determine directly a gene’s function in a cell or organism, the most
effective approach involves studying mutants that either lack the gene or express
an altered version of it. Determining which cell processes have been disrupted or
compromised in such mutants will usually shed light on a gene’s biological role.
   In this section, we describe several approaches to determining a gene’s func-
tion, starting either from an individual with an interesting phenotype or from a
DNA sequence. We begin with the classical genetic approach, which starts with
a genetic screen for isolating mutants of interest and then proceeds toward iden-
tification of the gene or genes responsible for the observed phenotype. We then
describe the set of techniques that are sometimes called reverse genetics, in
which one begins with a gene or gene sequence and attempts to determine its
function. This approach often involves some intelligent guesswork—searching
for similar sequences in other organisms or determining when and where a
gene is expressed—as well as generating mutant organisms and characterizing
their phenotype.

Classical Genetic Screens Identify Random Mutants
with Specific Abnormalities

Before the advent of gene cloning technology, most genes were identified by the
abnormalities produced when the gene was mutated. Indeed, the very concept of
the gene was deduced from the heritability of such abnormalities. This classical
genetic approach—identifying the genes responsible for mutant phenotypes—is
most easily performed in organisms that reproduce rapidly and are amenable
to genetic manipulation, such as bacteria, yeasts, nematode worms, and fruit
flies. Although spontaneous mutants can sometimes be found by examin-
ing extremely large populations—thousands or tens of thousands of individual
organisms—isolating mutant individuals is much more efficient if one generates
mutations with chemicals or radiation that damage DNA. By treating organisms
with such mutagens, very large numbers of mutant individuals can be created
quickly and then screened for a particular defect of interest.
  An alternative approach to chemical or radiation mutagenesis is called inser-
tional mutagenesis. This method relies on the fact that exogenous DNA inserted
randomly into the genome can produce mutations if the inserted fragment inter-
rupts a gene or its regulatory sequences. The inserted DNA, whose sequence
is known, then serves as a molecular tag that aids in the subsequent identifi-
cation and cloning of the disrupted gene (Figure 8–47). In Drosophila, the use
of the transposable P element to inactivate genes has revolutionized the study
of gene function in the fly. Transposable elements (see Table 5–4, p. 308) have
also been used to generate mutations in bacteria, yeast, mice, and the flowering     Figure 8–47 Insertional mutant of the
                                                                                     snapdragon, Antirrhinum. A mutation
plant Arabidopsis.                                                                                                                             in a single gene coding for a regulatory
   Once a collection of mutants in a model organism has been produced, one     protein causes leafy shoots (left) to develop
generally must examine thousands of individuals to find the altered phenotype      in place of flowers, which occur in the
of interest. Such a search is called a genetic screen, and the larger the genome,     normal plant (right). The mutation causes
the less likely it is that any particular gene will be mutated. Therefore, the larger      cells to adopt a character that would be
                                                                                                     appropriate to a different part of the normal
the genome of an organism, the bigger the screening task becomes. The pheno-                                                                                                                 plant, so instead of a flower, the cells
type being screened for can be simple or complex. Simple phenotypes are easiest    produce a leafy shoot. (Courtesy of Enrico
to detect: one can screen many organisms rapidly, for example, for mutations    Coen and Rosemary Carpenter.)

=== Original PDF page 559 ===
520   PANEL 8–1:  Review of Classical Genetics


 GENES AND PHENOTYPES
  Gene:   a functional unit of inheritance, usually corresponding
           to the segment of DNA coding for a single protein.
  Genome: all of an organism’s DNA sequences.
                    locus: the site of the gene in the genome

                                                                Wild type: the normal,       Mutant: differing from the
                      alleles: alternative forms of a gene                     naturally occurring type      wild type because of a genetic
                                                                                      change (a mutation)

                                       homozygous A/A             heterozygous a/A           homozygous a/a
   GENOTYPE: the speciﬁc set of
    alleles forming the genome of
   an individual

   PHENOTYPE: the visible
    character of the individual

                                                              allele A is dominant (relative to a); allele a is recessive (relative to A)
                                        In the example above, the phenotype of the heterozygote is the same as that of one of the
                                homozygotes; in cases where it is different from both, the two alleles are said to be codominant.


 CHROMOSOMES             a chromosome at the beginning of the cell        THE HAPLOID–DIPLOID CYCLE
                                           cycle, in G1 phase; the single long bar                                                       OF SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
                    centromere        represents one long double helix of DNA

   short “p” arm                                  long “q” arm
                       a chromosome near the end of the cell cycle, in
                        metaphase; it is duplicated and condensed, consisting of                mother               father
                     two identical sister chromatids (each containing one DNA                         DIPLOID
                        double helix) joined at the centromere.
     short         long                                                                                      MEIOSIS
    “p” arm      “q” arm               A normal diploid chromosome set, as
  pair of                                    seen in a metaphase spread, prepared                    HAPLOID
  autosomes                                by bursting open a cell at metaphase
                                      and staining the scattered
                     maternal 1               chromosomes. In the example shown              egg                sperm
                                                schematically here, there are three
                                                   pairs of autosomes (chromosomes
        paternal 1                   paternal 3      inherited symmetrically from                     SEXUAL FUSION (FERTILIZATION)
                      maternal 3               both parents, regardless of sex) and
                                     two sex chromosomes—an X from the
                                                                                                           DIPLOID
                 paternal 2                   mother and a Y from the father. The
                              maternal 2       numbers and types of sex                                                   maternal
                                                                                                              chromosome                                       chromosomes and their role in sex
                             Y         determination are variable from one                          zygote        paternal                    X                                                                                                              chromosome
                                                       class of organisms to another, as is the
                                     number of pairs of autosomes.             For simplicity, the cycle is shown for only
                                         sex chromosomes                                one chromosome/chromosome pair.


  MEIOSIS AND GENETIC RECOMBINATION           genotype Ab                   The greater the distance
                                                                                between two loci on a single
        maternal chromosome                                     A         b        chromosome, the greater is the
                                                                                       chance that they will be
               A         B            MEIOSIS AND                                       separated by crossing-over
                                      RECOMBINATION                  site of crossing-over         occurring at a site between them.        paternal chromosome
                                                                                                                                             If two genes are thus reassorted
                    a         b                               genotype aB                         in x% of gametes, they are said
                                                                                              to be separated on a
             diploid germ cell                                              a         B                                                                              chromosome by a genetic map
                  AB                                                                       distance of x map units (or            genotype
                    ab                                haploid gametes (eggs or sperm)    x centimorgans).

=== Original PDF page 560 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  521



  TYPES OF MUTATIONS



                                                               DELETION: deletes a segment of a chromosome

      POINT MUTATION: maps to a single site in the genome,
       corresponding to a single nucleotide pair or a very
       small part of a single gene





       INVERSION: inverts a segment of a chromosome                                                           TRANSLOCATION: breaks off a segment from one
                                                          chromosome and attaches it to another
      lethal mutation: causes the developing organism to die
     prematurely.                                                    gain-of-function mutation: increases the activity of the gene
      conditional mutation: produces its phenotypic effect only        or makes it active in inappropriate circumstances; these
     under certain conditions, called the restrictive conditions.        mutations are usually dominant.
     Under other conditions—the permissive conditions—the         dominant-negative mutation: dominant-acting mutation that
      effect is not seen. For a temperature-sensitive mutation, the      blocks gene activity, causing a loss-of-function phenotype
      restrictive condition typically is high temperature, while the     even in the presence of a normal copy of the gene. This
      permissive condition is low temperature.                   phenomenon occurs when the mutant gene product
      loss-of-function mutation: either reduces or abolishes the         interferes with the function of the normal gene product.
      activity of the gene. These are the most common class of         suppressor mutation: suppresses the phenotypic effect of
     mutations. Loss-of-function mutations are usually               another mutation, so that the double mutant seems normal.
     recessive—the organism can usually function normally as long   An intragenic suppressor mutation lies within the gene
      as it retains at least one normal copy of the affected gene.        affected by the ﬁrst mutation; an extragenic suppressor
      null mutation: a loss-of-function mutation that completely       mutation lies in a second gene—often one whose product
      abolishes the activity of the gene.                                  interacts directly with the product of the ﬁrst.



 TWO GENES OR ONE?
  Given two mutations that produce the same phenotype, how can   In the simplest type of complementation test, an individual who
 we tell whether they are mutations in the same gene? If the           is homozygous for one mutation is mated with an individual
  mutations are recessive (as they most often are), the answer can   who is homozygous for the other. The phenotype of the
 be found by a complementation test.                              offspring gives the answer to the question.
                   COMPLEMENTATION:                                NONCOMPLEMENTATION:
            MUTATIONS IN TWO DIFFERENT GENES             TWO INDEPENDENT MUTATIONS IN THE SAME GENE

      homozygous mutant mother        homozygous mutant father        homozygous mutant mother        homozygous mutant father


                    a                                        b                            a1                                  a2
                    a                                        b                            a1                                  a2





                                      a                                                                         a1

                                          b                                                                 a2





             hybrid offspring shows normal phenotype:                    hybrid offspring shows mutant phenotype:
           one normal copy of each gene is present                  no normal copies of the mutated gene are present

=== Original PDF page 561 ===
522    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                                 mutant cells proliferate     Figure 8–48 Screening for temperature-
                                                               and form a colony at        sensitive bacterial or yeast mutants.
                                                                        the permissive            Mutagenized cells are plated out at the
                                                                      temperature               permissive temperature. They divide and
                                                                                            form colonies, which are transferred to                                                            23oC
                                                                                     two identical Petri dishes by replica
                             colonies replicated                          mutant cells do not           plating. One of these plates is incubated
                         onto two identical                                 proliferate and fail           at the permissive temperature, the other
                             plates and incubated                             to form a colony at          at the restrictive temperature. Cells
                              at two different                              the nonpermissive
 mutagenized cells            temperatures                               temperature                containing a temperature-sensitive
 proliferate and form                                                                             mutation in a gene essential for proliferation
 colonies at 23oC                                              36oC                                                                                      can divide at the normal (permissive)
                                                                                               temperature but fail to divide at the
                                                                                                    elevated (restrictive) temperature.
that make it impossible for the organism to survive in the absence of a particular
amino acid or nutrient.
   Because defects in genes that are required for fundamental cell processes—
RNA synthesis and processing or cell-cycle control, for example—are usually
lethal, the functions of these genes are often studied in individuals with condi-
tional mutations. The mutant individuals function normally as long as permissive
conditions prevail but demonstrate abnormal gene function when subjected to
restrictive (nonpermissive) conditions. In organisms with temperature-sensitive
mutations, for example, the abnormality can be switched on and off experi-
mentally simply by changing the ambient temperature; thus, a cell containing
a temperature-sensitive mutation in a gene essential for survival will die at a
restrictive temperature but proliferate normally at a permissive temperature
(Figure 8–48). The temperature-sensitive gene in such a mutant usually contains
a point mutation that causes a subtle change in its protein product; for exam-
ple, the mutant protein may function normally at low temperatures but unfold at
higher temperatures.
   Temperature-sensitive mutations were crucial to find the bacterial genes that
encode the proteins required for DNA replication. The mutants were identified
by screening populations of mutagen-treated bacteria for cells that stop mak-
ing DNA when they are warmed from 30°C to 42°C. These mutants were later
used to identify and characterize the corresponding DNA replication proteins
(discussed in Chapter 5). Similarly, screens for temperature-sensitive mutations
in yeast led to the identification of many proteins involved in regulating the cell
cycle, as well as many proteins involved in moving proteins through the secretory
pathway. Related screening approaches demonstrated the function of enzymes
involved in the principal metabolic pathways of bacteria and yeast (discussed in                                                                                             Figure 8–49 Gene mutations that affect
Chapter 2) and identified many of the gene products responsible for the orderly     their protein product in different ways.
development of the Drosophila embryo (discussed in Chapter 21).                         In this example, the wild-type protein
                                                                                        has a specific cell function denoted by
Mutations Can Cause Loss or Gain of Protein Function                      thethis redfunctionrays. orMutationsinactivatethatit ateliminatehigher
                                                                                               temperatures are shown. The conditional
Gene mutations are generally classed as loss of function or gain of function. A loss-                                                                                         mutant protein carries an amino acid
of-function mutation results in a gene product that either does not work or works     substitution (red) that prevents its proper
too little; thus, it can reveal the normal function of the gene. A gain-of-function      folding at 37ºC but allows the protein to
mutation results in a gene product that works too much, works at the wrong time      fold and function normally at 25ºC. Such
or place, or works in a new way (Figure 8–49).                                               temperature-sensitive conditional mutations
                                                                                                     are especially useful for studying essential
  An important early step in the genetic analysis of any mutant cell or organ-                                                                                      genes (see Figure 8–48). In some cases,
ism is to determine whether the mutation causes a loss or a gain of function.    a mutation increases the activity of the
A standard test is to determine whether the mutation is dominant or recessive. A    mutant protein.



                                                                        conditional loss-           gain-of-function
  wild type                 loss-of-function mutation                  of-function mutation           mutation





                point mutation  truncation       deletion          37oC          25oC

=== Original PDF page 562 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  523


dominant mutation is one that still causes the mutant phenotype in the presence
of a single copy of the wild-type gene. A recessive mutation is one that is no longer
able to cause the mutant phenotype in the presence of a single wild-type copy of
the gene. In the majority of cases, recessive mutations are loss of function and
dominant mutations are gain of function—although cases have been described
in which a loss-of-function mutation is dominant or a gain-of-function mutation
is recessive. It is easy to determine if a mutation is dominant or recessive. One
simply mates a mutant with a wild type to obtain diploid cells or organisms. The
progeny from the mating will be heterozygous for the mutation. If the mutant
phenotype is no longer observed, one can conclude that the mutation is recessive
and is very likely to be a loss-of-function mutation (see Panel 8–1).

Complementation Tests Reveal Whether Two Mutations
Are in the Same Gene or Different Genes

A large-scale genetic screen can turn up many different mutations that show the
same phenotype. These defects might lie in different genes that function in the
same process or they might represent different mutations in the same gene. Alter-
native forms of the same gene are known as alleles. The most common difference
between alleles is a substitution of a single nucleotide pair, but different alleles
can also bear deletions, substitutions, and duplications. How can we tell, then,
whether two mutations that produce the same phenotype occur in the same gene
or in different genes? If the mutations are recessive—if, for example, they repre-
sent a loss of function of a particular gene—a complementation test can be used
to ascertain whether the mutations fall in the same gene or in different genes. To
test complementation in a diploid organism, an individual that is homozygous
for one mutation—that is, it possesses two identical alleles of the mutant gene in
question—is mated with an individual that is homozygous for the other muta-
tion. If the two mutations are in the same gene, the offspring show the mutant
phenotype, because they still will have no normal copies of the gene in ques-
tion. If, in contrast, the mutations fall in different genes, the resulting offspring
show a normal phenotype, because they retain one normal copy (and one mutant                                                                                             Figure 8–50 A complementation test can
copy) of each gene; the mutations thereby complement one another and restore     reveal that mutations in two different
a normal phenotype (Figure 8–50). Complementation testing of mutants identi-    genes are responsible for the same
fied during genetic screens has revealed, for example, that 5 different genes are    abnormal phenotype. When an albino
required for yeast to digest the sugar galactose, 20 genes are needed for E. coli to      (white) bird from one strain is bred with an
                                                                                                          albino from a different strain, the resulting
build a functional flagellum, 48 genes are involved in assembling bacteriophage                                                                                                             offspring (bottom) have normal coloration.
T4 viral particles, and hundreds of genes are involved in the development of an     This restoration of the wild-type plumage
adult nematode worm from a fertilized egg.                                                    indicates that the two white breeds lack
                                                                                                          color because of recessive mutations
                                                                                                                             in different genes. (From W. Bateson,
Gene Products Can Be Ordered in Pathways by Epistasis Analysis     Mendel’s Principles of Heredity, 1st ed.
                                                                                         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Once a set of genes involved in a particular biological process has been identi-     Press, 1913.)
fied, it is helpful to determine the order in which the genes function. Gene order
is perhaps easiest to explain for metabolic pathways, where, for example, enzyme
A is necessary to produce the substrate for enzyme B. In this case, we would say
that the gene encoding enzyme A acts before (upstream of) the gene encoding
enzyme B in the pathway. Similarly, where one protein regulates the activity of
another protein, we would say that the former gene acts before the latter. Gene
order can, in many cases, be determined purely by genetic analysis without any
knowledge of the mechanism of action of the gene products involved.
   Suppose we have a biosynthetic process consisting of a sequence of steps,
such that performance of step B requires completion of the preceding step A; and
suppose gene A is required for step A, and gene B is required for step B. Then a
null mutation (a mutation that abolishes function) in gene A will arrest the pro-
cess at step A, regardless of whether gene B is functional or not, whereas a null
mutation in gene B will cause arrest at step B only if gene A is still active. In such
a case, gene A is said to be epistatic to gene B. By comparing the phenotypes of
different combinations of mutations, we can therefore discover the order in which

=== Original PDF page 563 ===
524    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


            Golgi     secretory                                                                  Figure 8–51 Using genetics to determine
   ER    apparatus   vesicles                                                                  the order of function of genes. In normal
                                                                                                                             cells, secretory proteins are loaded into
                                                                                                                vesicles, which fuse with the plasma
                                                                             membrane to secrete their contents into
                                                                                                    the extracellular medium. Two mutants, A
                                                                                   and B, fail to secrete proteins. In mutant A,
                                                                                                      secretory proteins accumulate in the ER. In
secretory                                                                                  mutant B, secretory proteins accumulate
protein   normal cell        secretory mutant A       secretory mutant B      double mutant AB          in the Golgi. In the double mutant AB,
                             protein accumulates      protein accumulates     protein accumulates       proteins accumulate in the ER; this      protein secreted
                                        in ER               in Golgi apparatus               in ER               indicates that the gene defective in mutant
                                                                       A acts before the gene defective in mutant
                                                                   B in the secretory pathway.
the genes act. This type of analysis is called epistasis analysis. As an example,
the pathway of protein secretion in yeast has been analyzed in this way. Different
mutations in this pathway cause proteins to accumulate aberrantly in the endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) or in the Golgi apparatus. When a yeast cell is engineered
to carry both a mutation that blocks protein processing in the ER and a mutation
that blocks processing in the Golgi apparatus, proteins accumulate in the ER. This
indicates that proteins must pass through the ER before being sent to the Golgi
before secretion (Figure 8–51). Strictly speaking, an epistasis analysis can only
provide information about gene order in a pathway when both mutations are null
alleles. When the mutations retain partial function, their epistasis interactions
can be difficult to interpret.
   Sometimes, a double mutant will show a new or more severe phenotype than
either single mutant alone. This type of genetic interaction is called a synthetic
phenotype, and if the phenotype is death of the organism, it is called synthetic
lethality. In most cases, a synthetic phenotype indicates that the two genes act in
two different parallel pathways, either of which is capable of mediating the same
cell process. Thus, when both pathways are disrupted in the double mutant, the
process fails altogether, and the synthetic phenotype is observed.

Mutations Responsible for a Phenotype Can Be Identified
Through DNA Analysis

Once a collection of mutant organisms with interesting phenotypes has been
obtained, the next task is to identify the gene or genes responsible for the altered
phenotype. If the phenotype has been produced by insertional mutagenesis,
locating the disrupted gene is fairly simple. DNA fragments containing the inser-
tion (a transposon or a retrovirus, for example) are amplified by PCR, and the
nucleotide sequence of the flanking DNA is determined. The gene affected by
the insertion can then be identified by a computer-aided search of the complete
genome sequence of the organism.
     If a DNA-damaging chemical was used to generate the mutations, identifying
the inactivated gene is often more laborious, but there are several powerful strate-
gies available. With recent advances in DNA sequencing technology, it is possible
to simply determine the genome sequence of the mutant organism and identify the
affected gene by comparison with the wild-type sequence. Because of the contin-
ual accumulation of neutral mutations, there will probably be differences between
the two genome sequences in addition to the mutation responsible for the pheno-
type. One way of proving that a mutation is causative is to introduce the putative
mutation back into a normal organism and determine whether or not it causes the
mutant phenotype. We will discuss how this is accomplished later in the chapter.

Rapid and Cheap DNA Sequencing Has Revolutionized Human
Genetic Studies

Genetic screens in model experimental organisms have been spectacularly suc-
cessful in identifying genes and relating them to various phenotypes, including
many that are conserved between these organisms and humans. But how can we

=== Original PDF page 564 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  525


study humans directly? They do not reproduce rapidly, cannot be treated with
mutagens, and, if they have a defect in an essential process such as DNA replica-
tion, would die long before birth.
   Despite their limitations compared to model organisms, humans are becom-
ing increasingly attractive subjects for genetic studies. Because the human
population is so large, spontaneous nonlethal mutations have arisen many times
in all human genes. A substantial proportion of these mutations remains in the
genomes of present-day humans. Deleterious mutations are discovered when
 the mutant individuals call attention to themselves by seeking medical help.
   With the recent advances that have enabled the sequencing of entire human
genomes cheaply and quickly, we can now identify such mutations and study
their evolution and inheritance in ways that were impossible even a few years ago.
By comparing the sequences of thousands of human genomes from all around
the world, we can begin to identify directly the DNA differences that distinguish
one individual from another. These differences hold clues to our evolutionary
origins and can be used to explore the roots of disease.

Linked Blocks of Polymorphisms Have Been Passed Down
from Our Ancestors

When we compare the sequences of multiple human genomes, we find that any
two individuals will differ in roughly 1 nucleotide pair in 1000. As described in
Chapter 4, most sequence variation results from substitution of a single nucle-
otide, called a single-nucleotide variant (SNV), while other variation is due to
structural chromosome changes such as deletions and rearrangements. Human
genetic studies have benefited greatly from a particularly common type of
sequence variants, present in more than 1% of the population, that are called
polymorphisms—most of which are single-nucleotide polymorphisms, or
SNPs (Figure 8–52). Although these common variants can be found throughout
the genome, they are not scattered randomly—or even independently. Instead,
they tend to travel in groups called haplotype blocks—combinations of polymor-
phisms that are inherited as a unit.
   To understand why such haplotype blocks exist, we need to consider our evo-
lutionary history. It is thought that modern humans expanded from a relatively
small population—perhaps around 10,000 individuals—that existed in Africa
about 200,000 years ago. Among that small group of our ancestors, some indi-
viduals will have carried one set of genetic variants, others a different set. The
chromosomes of a present-day human represent a shuffled combination of chro-
mosome segments from different members of this small ancestral group of people.
Because only about 2000 generations separate us from them, large segments of
these ancestral chromosomes have passed from parent to child, unbroken by the
crossover events that occur during meiosis. As described in Chapter 5, only a few
crossovers occur between each set of homologous chromosomes during each
meiosis (see Figure 5–52).


                               ~1000 nucleotide pairs

                             T G T         G A C           C G T              individual A                       A C A           C T G         G C A

                             T A T         G T C           C A T              individual B                       A T A           C A G         G T A

                             T A T         G A C           C A T              individual C                       A T A           C T G         G T A

                             T G T         G A C           C A T              individual D                       A C A           C T G         G T A


                            SNP1             SNP2             SNP3

Figure 8–52 Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are sites in the genome where two or
more alternative choices of a nucleotide are common in the population. Most such variations
in the human genome occur at locations where they do not significantly affect a gene’s function.

=== Original PDF page 565 ===
526    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


   As  a  result,  certain  sets  of DNA  sequences—and  their  associated
polymorphisms—have been inherited in linked groups, with little genetic rear-
rangement across the generations. These are the haplotype blocks. Like genes that
exist in different allelic forms, haplotype blocks also come in a limited number of
variants that are common in the human population, each representing a combi-
nation of DNA polymorphisms passed down from a particular ancestor long ago.

Sequence Variants Can Aid the Search for Mutations Associated
with Disease

Mutations that give rise, in a reproducible way, to rare but clearly defined dif-
ferences, such as albinism, hemophilia, or congenital deafness, can often be
identified by studies of affected families. Such single-gene, or monogenic, dis-
orders are referred to as Mendelian because their pattern of inheritance is easy
to track. Moreover, individuals who inherit the causative mutation will exhibit
the disorder irrespective of environmental factors such as diet or exercise. But for
many common disorders, the genetic roots are more complex. Instead of a single
allele of a single gene, such disorders stem from a combination of contributions
from multiple genes. And often, environmental factors have strong influences
on the severity of the disorder. For these multigenic conditions, such as diabetes
or arthritis, population studies are often helpful in tracking down the genes that
increase the risk of getting the disease.
   In population studies, investigators collect DNA samples from a large number
of people who have the disease and compare them to samples from a group of
people who do not have the disease. They look for variants—SNPs, for example—
that are more common among the people who have the disease. Because DNA
sequences that are close together on a chromosome tend to be inherited together,
the presence of such SNPs could indicate that an allele that increases the risk of
the disease might lie nearby (Figure 8–53). Although, in principle, the disease
could be caused by the SNP itself, the culprit is much more likely to be a change
that is merely linked to the SNP as part of a haplotype block.
   Such genome-wide association studies have been used to search for genes that
predispose individuals to common diseases, including diabetes, coronary artery
disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and even depression. For many of these condi-
tions, the DNA polymorphisms identified increase the risk of disease only slightly.
Moreover, environmental factors (diet and exercise, for example) play an import-     Figure 8–53 Genes that affect the
ant role in the onset and severity of the disease. Nonetheless, the identification     risk of developing a common disease
                                                                                can often be tracked down through
of potential disease genes linked to polymorphisms is leading to a mechanistic                                                                                                linkage to SNPs. Here, the patterns
understanding of some of our most common disorders.                                       of SNPs are compared between two
                                                                                                     sets of individuals—a set of healthy
                                                                                                         controls and a set affected by a particular
       healthy individuals                                                     common disease. A segment of a
                                                                                                                   typical chromosome is shown. For most
       individual A                                                                             polymorphic sites in this segment, it is
                                                                                       a random matter whether an individual
              B                                                                        has one SNP variant (red vertical bars)
                                                                                                       or another (blue vertical bars); this same
              C                                                                     randomness is seen both for the control
                                                                                         group and for the affected individuals.            D
                                                                                          However, in the part of the chromosome
               E                                                                                          that is shaded in dark gray, a bias is seen:
                                                                                   most healthy individuals have the blue SNP
                                                                                                                 variants, whereas most affected individuals
       affected individuals                                                                  have the red SNP variants. This suggests
                                                                                                             that this region contains or is close to a       individual A
                                                                                    gene that is genetically linked to these
              B                                                                                red SNP variants and which predisposes
                                                                                                                individuals to the disease. Using carefully
              C                                                                                  selected controls and thousands of
                                                                                                        affected individuals, this approach can help
            D                                                                                      track down disease-related genes, even
                                                                             when they confer only a slight increase in
               E                                                                                  the risk of developing the disease.

=== Original PDF page 566 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  527

Genomics Is Accelerating the Discovery of Rare Mutations That
Predispose Us to Serious Disease

The polymorphisms that have allowed us to identify some of the genes that
increase our risk of disease are common. They arose long ago in our evolutionary
past and are now present, in one form or another, in a substantial portion of the
population. Such polymorphisms are thought to account for about 90% of the dif-
ferences between one person’s genome and another. But when we try to tie these
common variants to differences in disease susceptibility or other heritable traits,
such as height, we find that they do not have as much predictive power as we had
anticipated: thus, for example, most confer relatively small increases—less than
twofold—in the risk of developing a common disease.
   Part of the problem is that many of the mutations that are directly respon-
sible for complex human diseases appeared more recently in our evolutionary
history—during a period when the human population expanded from the few
million individuals who existed 10,000 years ago to the more than 7 billion who
exist today. Because recent mutations occur more rarely than the ancient poly-
morphisms that are common in the human population, they could slip through
the genome-wide association studies just described.
   In contrast to polymorphisms, rare DNA variants—those much less frequent
in humans than SNPs—can have large effects on the risk of developing some
common diseases. For example, numerous loss-of-function mutations, each indi-
vidually rare, have been found to increase greatly the predisposition to autism and
schizophrenia. Many of these are de novo mutations, which arose spontaneously
in the germ-line cells of one or the other parent. The fact that these mutations
arise spontaneously with some frequency could help explain why these com-
mon disorders—each observed in about 1% of the population—remain with us,
even though the affected individuals might leave few or no descendants. These
rare mutations can arise in any one of hundreds of different genes, which could
explain much of the clinical variability of autism and schizophrenia.
  Now that DNA sequencing has become fast and inexpensive, the most efficient
way to identify these rare, large-effect mutations is by comparing the genomes of
large numbers of affected individuals with those of unaffected controls. When the
key variants are identified, the major challenge is then to determine how they
affect the individuals who carry them and how small variations in multiple genes
produce the disease phenotype.

The Cellular Functions of a Known Gene Can Be Studied
with Genome Engineering

As we have seen, classical genetics starts with a mutant phenotype and identifies
the mutations, and consequently the genes, responsible for it. Recombinant DNA
technology has made possible a different type of genetic approach that is used
widely in a variety of species. Instead of beginning with a mutant organism and
using it to identify a gene and its protein, an investigator can start with a particu-
lar gene and proceed to make mutations in it, creating mutant cells or organisms
so as to analyze the gene’s function. Because this approach reverses the tradi-
tional direction of genetic discovery—proceeding from genes to mutations, rather
than vice versa—it is sometimes referred to as reverse genetics. And because the
genome of the organism is deliberately altered in a particular way, this approach
is also called genome engineering or genome editing. We shall see in this chapter
that this approach can be scaled up so that whole collections of organisms can be
created, each of which has a different gene altered.
   There are several ways a gene of interest can be altered. In the simplest, the
gene can simply be deleted from the genome, although in a diploid organism,
this requires that both copies—one on each chromosome homolog—be deleted.
Such gene knockouts are especially useful if the gene is not essential. The gene in
question (even if it is essential) can also be replaced by one that is expressed in
the wrong tissue or at the wrong time in development; this type of manipulation

=== Original PDF page 567 ===
528    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems



                                                                                           doxycycline
                    transcriptionalTet repressor                   activator domainDNA-binding
  domain



                                   gene X                                                  gene X


     cis-regulatory sequences                               GENE ON                                            GENE OFF
         for Tet repressor
(A)                                                                               (B)

Figure 8–54 Engineered genes can be turned on and off with small molecules. Here, the DNA-binding portion of a
bacterial protein (the tetracycline, Tet, repressor) has been fused to a portion of a mammalian transcriptional activator and
expressed in cultured mammalian cells. The engineered gene X, present in place of the normal gene, has its usual gene
control region replaced by cis-regulatory sequences recognized by the tetracycline repressor. In the absence of doxycycline
(a particularly stable version of tetracycline), the engineered gene is expressed; in the presence of doxycycline, the gene is
turned off because the drug causes the tetracycline repressor to dissociate from the DNA. This strategy can also be used in
mice by incorporating the engineered genes into the germ line. In many tissues, the gene can be turned on and off simply by
adding doxycycline to or removing it from the animal’s water. If the tetracycline repressor construct is placed under the control
of a tissue-specific gene control region, the engineered gene will be turned on and off only in that tissue.


often provides important clues to the gene’s normal function. In a particularly
powerful approach, a gene of interest can be modified to be expressed at will by
the experimenter (Figure 8–54). Finally, genes can also be engineered so that they
are expressed normally in most cell types and tissues but deleted in certain cell
types or tissues selected by the experimenter (see Figure 5–66). This approach is
especially useful when a gene has different roles in different tissues.
     It is also possible to make subtler changes to a gene. It is sometimes useful to
make slight changes in a protein’s structure so that one can begin to dissect which
portions of a protein are important for its function. The activity of an enzyme, for
example, can be studied by changing a single amino acid in its active site. It is also
possible, through genome engineering, to create new types of proteins in an ani-
mal. For example, a gene can be fused to the gene for a fluorescent protein. When
this altered gene is introduced into the genome, the protein can be tracked in the
living organism by monitoring its fluorescence.
   Altered genes can be created in several ways. Perhaps the simplest is to chemi-
cally synthesize the DNA that makes up the gene. In this way, the investigator can
specify any type of variant of the normal gene. It is also possible to construct altered
genes using recombinant DNA technology, as described earlier in this chapter. Once
obtained, altered genes can be introduced into cells in a variety of ways. DNA can
be microinjected into mammalian cells with a glass micropipette or introduced by
a virus that has been engineered to carry foreign genes. In plant cells, genes can be
introduced by a technique called particle bombardment: DNA samples are painted
onto tiny gold beads and then literally shot through the cell wall with a specially
modified gun. Electroporation is sometimes used for introducing DNA into bacteria
and some other cells. In this technique, a brief electric shock renders the cell mem-
brane temporarily permeable, allowing foreign DNA to enter the cytoplasm.
   To be most useful to experimenters, the altered gene, once it is introduced into
a cell, must recombine with the cell’s genome so that the normal gene is replaced.
In simple organisms such as bacteria and yeasts, this process occurs with high fre-
quency using the cell’s own homologous recombination machinery, as described
in Chapter 5. In more complex organisms that have elaborate developmental
programs, the procedure is more complicated because the altered gene must be
introduced into the germ line, as we next describe.

Animals and Plants Can Be Genetically Altered

Animals and plants that have been genetically engineered by gene deletion or
gene replacement are called transgenic organisms, and any foreign or modified
genes that are added are called transgenes. We discuss transgenic plants later

=== Original PDF page 568 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  529


      (A)        ES cells growing                            (B)    female mouse                         Figure 8–55 Summary of the procedures
                     in culture                                                          used for making gene replacements in
                                                                                          mice. (A) In the first step, an altered version
                                                                                                               of the gene is introduced into cultured
                                                                                          embryonic stem (ES) cells (described in
                                                                                           Chapter 22). Only a few ES cells will have
                                                    MATE AND HARVEST
                                                                                                                          their corresponding normal genes replaced                    INTRODUCE A DNA                        EARLY EMBRYOS
                  FRAGMENT CONTAINING                                               by the altered gene through a homologous
    altered version      ALTERED GENE INTO                                                       recombination event. These cells can be
    of target gene    MANY CELLS                                            isolated                      identified by PCR and cultured to produce
    constructed by                               INJECT                      early embryo           many descendants, each of which carries
        genetic                                 ES CELLS
     engineering       LET EACH CELL           INTO                                       an altered gene in place of one of its two
                      PROLIFERATE TO     EARLY EMBRYO                                      normal corresponding genes. (B) In the
                 FORM A COLONY                                                           next step of the procedure, these altered
                                                                          ES cells are injected into a very early mouse
                                                                                         embryo; the cells are incorporated into the
                                                                                            growing embryo, and a mouse produced
                                                                                       by such an embryo will contain some
                                                           HYBRID EARLY EMBRYO         somatic cells (indicated by orange) that
                                                             PARTLY FORMED FROM          carry the altered gene. Some of these mice
                                                                   ES CELLS                                 will also contain germ-line cells that contain
                       TEST FOR THE RARE                                                          the altered gene; when bred with a normal
                  COLONY IN WHICH                                                                                    mouse, some of the progeny of these mice                    THE DNA FRAGMENT
                   HAS REPLACED ONE                                                                                 will contain one copy of the altered gene in
                   COPY OF THE                                                                                                 all of their cells.
                 NORMAL GENE                                                       The mice with the transgene in their                                                         INTRODUCE HYBRID
                                                            EARLY EMBRYO INTO          germ line are then bred to produce
                                                       PSEUDOPREGNANT             both a male and a female animal, each
                                                   MOUSE                       heterozygous for the gene replacement
                                                                                                                       (that is, they have one normal and one
                                                                                          mutant copy of the gene). When these two         ES cells with one copy of target
        gene replaced by mutant gene                                                       mice are mated (not shown), one-fourth of
                                                                                                                          their progeny will be homozygous for the
                                                                BIRTH                            altered gene.





                                                            SOMATIC CELLS OF
                                                                 OFFSPRING TESTED FOR
                                                               PRESENCE OF ALTERED
                                                                 GENE, AND SELECTED
                                                             MICE BRED TO TEST FOR
                                                         GENE IN GERM-LINE CELLS





                                                 TRANSGENIC MOUSE
                                              WITH ONE COPY OF
                                               TARGET GENE REPLACED
                                               BY ALTERED GENE
                                                              IN GERM LINE


in this chapter and, for now, concentrate our discussion on transgenic mice. If a
DNA molecule carrying a mutated mouse gene is transferred into a mouse cell, it
is possible to direct the mutant gene to replace the normal gene by homologous
recombination. By exploiting these gene-targeting events, any specific gene can
be altered or inactivated in a mouse cell by a direct gene replacement. In the case
in which both copies of the gene of interest are completely inactivated or deleted,
the resulting animal is called a knockout mouse. The technique is summarized in
Figure 8–55.
   The ability to prepare transgenic mice lacking a known normal gene was a
major advance, and the technique has been used to determine the functions of
many mouse genes (Figure 8–56). If the gene functions in early development, a
knockout mouse will usually die before it reaches adulthood. These lethal defects
can be carefully analyzed to help determine the function of the missing gene.

=== Original PDF page 569 ===
530    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                                                             Figure 8–56 Transgenic mice engineered
                                                                                                 to express a mutant DNA helicase
                                                                         show premature aging. The helicase,
                                                                                   encoded by the Xpd gene, is involved
                                                                                                                             in both transcription and DNA repair.
                                                                               Compared with a wild-type mouse of the
                                                                             same age (A), a transgenic mouse that
                                                                                             expresses a defective version of Xpd
                                                                                                                     (B) exhibits many of the symptoms of
     (A)                                                     (B)                                           premature aging, including osteoporosis,
                                                                                                    emaciation, early graying, infertility, and
                                                                                         reduced life span. The mutation in Xpd
As described in Chapter 5, an especially useful type of transgenic animal takes    used here impairs the activity of the
                                                                                                        helicase and mimics a mutation that inadvantage of a site-specific recombination system to excise—and thus disable—                                                                              humans causes trichothiodystrophy, a
the target gene in a particular place or at a particular time (see Figure 5–66). In     disorder characterized by brittle hair,
this case, the target gene in embryonic stem (ES) cells is replaced by a fully func-      skeletal abnormalities, and a very reduced
tional version of the gene that is flanked by a pair of the short DNA sequences,        life expectancy. These results indicate
called lox sites, that are recognized by the Cre recombinase protein. The transgenic     that an accumulation of DNA damage can
                                                                                                        contribute to the aging process in both
mice that result are phenotypically normal. They are then mated with transgenic                                                                              humans and mice. (From J. de Boer
mice that express the Cre recombinase gene under the control of an inducible      et al., Science 296:1276–1279, 2002.
promoter. In the specific cells or tissues in which Cre is switched on, it catalyzes     With permission from AAAS.)
recombination between the lox sequences—excising a target gene and eliminat-
ing its activity (see Figure 22–7).

The Bacterial CRISPR System Has Been Adapted to Edit
Genomes in a Wide Variety of Species

One of the difficulties in making transgenic mice by the procedure just described
is that the introduced DNA molecule (bearing the experimentally altered gene)
often inserts at random in the genome, and many ES cells must therefore be
screened individually to find one that has the correct gene replacement.
   Creative use of the CRISPR system, discovered in bacteria as a defense against
viruses, has largely solved this problem. As described in Chapter 7, the CRISPR
system uses a guide RNA sequence to target (through complementary base-pair-
ing) double-stranded DNA, which it then cleaves (see Figure 7–81). The gene
coding for the key component of this system, the bacterial Cas9 protein, has been
transferred into a variety of organisms, where it greatly simplifies the process
of making transgenic organisms (Figure 8–57A and B). The basic strategy is as
follows: Cas9 protein is expressed in cultured cells along with a guide RNA
designed by the experimenter to target a particular location on the genome.
The Cas9 and guide RNA associate, the complex is brought to the matching
sequence on the genome, and the Cas9 protein makes a double-strand break.
As we saw in Chapter 5, these breaks are usually repaired by nonhomologous
end joining, which often results in small sequence errors or deletions that dis-
rupt gene function. In many cases, this repair process is sufficient to inactivate
the gene, particularly if it produces a frameshift near the beginning of the cod-
ing sequence. If the goal is a precise gene knockout or replacement, then Cas9
and guide RNA can be co-expressed in ES cells with an altered homologous gene
sequence, which the cell uses to repair the double-strand break by homolo-
gous recombination. In this way, the normal gene can be selectively damaged
by the CRISPR system and replaced at high efficiency by an experimentally
altered gene.
   The CRISPR system has a variety of other uses. Its particular power lies with its
ability to target Cas9 to thousands of different positions across a genome through
the simple rules of complementary base-pairing. Thus, if a catalytically inactive
Cas9 protein is fused to a transcription activator or repressor, it is possible, in
principle, to turn any gene on or off by providing a guide RNA that matches a
unique sequence in the gene promoter (Figure 8–57C and D; Movie 8.4).
   The CRISPR system has several advantages over other strategies for exper-
imentally manipulating gene expression.  First,  it  is relatively easy for the
experimenter to design the guide RNA: it simply follows standard base-pairing

=== Original PDF page 570 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  531


                                                                                             Figure 8–57 Use of CRISPR to study                                                     3′                                                                               gene function in a wide variety of
                                                         guide RNA
                                                                                              species. (A) The Cas9 protein (artificially
               Cas9                                                                         expressed in the species of interest)
                protein                                                                           binds to a guide RNA, designed by the                                        cleavage site
                                                                                                experimenter and also expressed. The
                    3′                                               double-stranded                     portion of RNA in light blue is needed
                    5′                                  DNA in genome                         for associations with Cas9; that in dark
                                                                                                   blue is specified by the experimenter to                                        cleavage site
                                                                                   match a position on the genome. The
                             target gene
                  (A)                                                                                    only other requirement is that the adjacent
                                                                             genome sequence includes a short PAM
                                                                                                   (protospacer adjacent motif, not shown)
                                          altered version of
                                                                                                             that is needed for Cas9 to cleave. As                                       target gene produced
                                  by genetic engineering                                         described in Chapter 7, this sequence
                                                                                                     allows the CRISPR system in a bacterium
                                                                                                          to distinguish its own genome from that
                                                                                                               of invading viruses. (B) When Cas9 is
                                                                                                       directed to make a double-strand break in
                                                                                       a gene, the break is generally repaired by
                             HOMOLOGOUS                                      nonhomologous end joining (not shown),
                double-strand break    RECOMBINATION      target gene replaced                  which introduces local sequence errors that
            made by Cas9                               by altered version
                                                                                      can disrupt gene function. A more precise
                   (B)                                                                               mutation can be made as shown here,
                                                                                      where the double-strand break is repaired
                   catalytically inactive Cas9 fused        catalytically inactive Cas9 fused                  by homologous recombination with an
               with transcription activator          with transcription repressor                          altered gene provided by the experimenter.
                                                                                                              (C, D) By using a mutant form of Cas9
                                                                                                             that can no longer cleave DNA, Cas9 can
                                                                                  be used to activate a normally dormant
                                                                                     gene (C) or turn off an actively expressed
                                                                                     gene (D). (Adapted from P. Mali et al., Nat.
                             TARGET                        TARGET                   Methods 10:957–963, 2013.)                   upstream
                           GENE ON                      GENE OFF                     recognition
                   (C)  sequence                          (D)



convention. Second, the gene to be controlled does not have to be modified; the
CRISPR strategy exploits DNA sequences already present in the genome. Third,
numerous genes can be controlled simultaneously. Cas9 has to be expressed only
once, but many guide RNAs can be expressed in the same cell; this strategy allows
the experimenter to turn on or off a whole set of genes at once.
   The export of the CRISPR system from bacteria to virtually all other experi-
mental organisms (including mice, zebrafish, worms, flies, rice, and wheat) has
revolutionized the study of gene function. Like the earlier discovery of restric-
tion nucleases, this breakthrough came from scientists studying a fascinating
phenomenon in bacteria without—at first—realizing the enormous impact these
discoveries would have on all aspects of biology.

Large Collections of Engineered Mutations Provide a Tool
for Examining the Function of Every Gene in an Organism

Extensive collaborative efforts have produced comprehensive libraries of muta-
tions in a variety of model organisms, including S. cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis
elegans, Drosophila, Arabidopsis, and even the mouse. The ultimate aim in each
case is to produce a collection of mutant strains in which every gene in the
organism—one at a time—has been systematically deleted or altered in such a
way that it can be conditionally disrupted. Collections of this type provide an
invaluable resource for investigating gene function on a genomic scale. For
example, a large collection of mutant organisms can be screened for a particular
phenotype. Like the classic genetic approaches described earlier, this is one
of the most powerful ways to identify the genes responsible for a particular
phenotype. Unlike the classical genetic approach, however, the set of mutants
is “pre-engineered,” so that there is no need to rely on chance events such as

=== Original PDF page 571 ===
532    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


               sequence               selectable      unique “bar-code”                            Figure 8–58 Making bar-coded
              homologous to       marker gene    sequence                                      collections of mutant organisms. A
                 yeast target                                                                               deletion construct for use in yeast contains
              gene X                                                                   DNA sequences (red) homologous to each
                                                                                   end of a target gene X, a selectable marker                                                                         yeast
                                                          chromosome                 gene (blue), and a unique “bar-code”
                                                                                      sequence approximately 20 nucleotide
                                                                                                            pairs in length (green). This DNA is
                                                                                                  introduced into yeast cells, where it readily
                                        yeast target gene X                                             replaces the target gene by homologous
                                                                                                   recombination. Cells that carry a successful
                                 HOMOLOGOUS                                  gene replacement are identified by
                                      RECOMBINATION                                     expression of the selectable marker gene,
                                                                                                                        typically a gene that provides resistance
                                                                                                          to a drug. By using a collection of such
                                                                                                       constructs, each specific for one gene, a
                     target gene X replaced by selectable marker gene and                                      library of yeast mutants was constructed
                                associated “bar-code” sequence                                          containing a mutant for every gene.
                                                                                                           Essential genes cannot be studied this way,
                                                                                          as their deletion from the genome causes
                                                                                                    the cells to die. In this case, the target gene
spontaneous mutations or transposon insertions. In addition, each of the indi-       is replaced by a version of the gene that
vidual mutations within the collection is often engineered to contain a distinct    can be regulated by the experimenter (see
                                                                                                       Figure 8–54). The gene can then be turnedmolecular “bar code”—in the form of a unique DNA sequence—designed to                                                                                                                                       off, and the effect of this can be monitored
make identification of the altered gene rapid and routine (Figure 8–58).               before the cells die.
   In S. cerevisiae, the task of generating a complete set of 6000 mutants, each
missing only one gene, was accomplished in the early 2000s. Because each
mutant strain has an individual bar-code sequence embedded in its genome,
a large mixture of engineered strains can be grown under various selective test
conditions—such as nutritional deprivation, a temperature shift, or the presence
of various drugs—and the cells that survive can be rapidly identified by the unique
sequence tags present in their genomes. By assessing how well each mutant in
the mixture fares, one can begin to discern which genes are essential, useful, or
irrelevant for growth under the various conditions (Figure 8–59).
   Similar methods can be applied to human cells using the CRISPR system
described earlier. Using viral expression vectors, a large library of different guide
RNAs can be expressed in a cell population, such that only one guide RNA is                                                                                                        pool of bar-coded yeast mutants,
expressed in each cell, along with Cas9. After growth of the cells under various           each deleted for a different gene
conditions, surviving cells are subjected to genomic sequencing to measure the
abundance of guide RNAs in the population. Guide RNAs that target genes essen-
tial for survival will disappear from the population, whereas those that enhance                                bar codes
survival will be enriched—providing important clues about the function of those           grow pool in condition of choice
genes under the conditions tested.
   The insights generated by examining mutant libraries can be consider-
able. For example, studies of an extensive collection of mutants in Mycoplasma
genitalium—the organism with the smallest known genome—have identified the
minimum complement of genes essential for cellular life. Growth under labora-
tory conditions requires about three-quarters of the 480 protein-coding genes in
M. genitalium. Approximately 100 of these essential genes are of unknown func-
tion, which suggests that a surprising number of the basic molecular mechanisms                     purify genomic DNA
that underlie life have yet to be discovered.



Figure 8–59 Genome-wide screens for fitness using a large pool of bar-coded yeast
deletion mutants. A large pool of yeast mutants, each with a different gene deleted and present                                                                                                                analyze relative abundance
in equal amounts, is grown under conditions selected by the experimenter. Some mutants (blue)                         of each bar code
grow normally, but others show reduced growth (orange and green) or no growth at all (red). The
fitness of each mutant is experimentally determined in the following way. After the growth phase
is completed, genomic DNA (isolated from the mixture of strains) is purified, and the relative                         rate
abundance of each mutant is determined by quantifying the level of the DNA bar code matched
to each deletion. This can be done by sequencing the pooled genomic DNA. In this way, thecontribution of every gene to growth under the specified condition can be rapidly ascertained.                               growth
This type of study has revealed that of the approximately 6000 coding genes in yeast, only                     1       2       3       4
about 1000 are essential under standard growth conditions.                                                             deletion mutant

=== Original PDF page 572 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  533


   Collections of mutant organisms are also available for many animal and plant
species. For example, it is possible to “order,” by phone or e-mail from a consor-
tium of investigators, a deletion or insertion mutant for almost all coding genes
in Drosophila. Likewise, a nearly complete set of mutants exists for the model
plant Arabidopsis. And the adaptation of the CRISPR system for use in mice
means that, in the near future, we can expect to be able to turn on or off—at will—
each gene in the mouse genome at different stages of development. Although we
are still ignorant about the function of most genes in most organisms, these tech-
nologies allow an exploration of gene function on a scale that was unimaginable
a decade ago.

RNA Interference Is a Simple and Rapid Way to Test
Gene Function

Although knocking out (or conditionally expressing) a gene in an organism and
studying the consequences is the most powerful approach for understanding the
functions of the gene, RNA interference (RNAi, for short) is an alternative, par-
ticularly convenient approach. As discussed in Chapter 7, this method exploits a
natural mechanism used in many plants, animals, and fungi to protect themselves
against viruses and transposable elements. The technique introduces into a cell
or organism a double-strand RNA molecule whose nucleotide sequence matches
that of part of the gene to be inactivated. After the RNA is processed, it hybrid-
izes with the target-gene RNA (either mRNA or noncoding RNA) and reduces its
expression by the mechanisms shown in Figure 7–78.
   RNAi is frequently used to inactivate genes in Drosophila and mammalian cell
culture lines. Indeed, a set of 15,000 Drosophila RNAi molecules (one for every
coding gene) allows researchers, in several months, to test the role of every fly
gene in any process that can be monitored using cultured cells. RNAi has also
been widely used to study gene function in whole organisms, including the nem-
atode C. elegans. When working with worms, introducing the double-stranded
RNA is quite simple: either the RNA can be injected directly into the intestine of
the worm or the worm can be fed with E. coli engineered to produce the RNA
(Figure 8–60). The RNA is amplified and distributed throughout the body of the
worm, where it inhibits expression of the target gene in different tissue types.
RNAi is being used to help in assigning functions to the entire complement of
worm genes (Figure 8–61).
  A related technique has also been applied to mice. In this case, the RNAi
molecules are not injected or fed to the mouse; rather, recombinant DNA tech-
niques are used to make transgenic animals that express the RNAi under the
control of an inducible promoter. Often this is a specially designed RNA that can
fold back on itself and, through base-pairing, produce a double-strand region that
is recognized by the RNAi machinery. In the simplest cases, the process inacti-
vates only the genes that exactly match the RNAi sequence. Depending on the



    E. coli, expressing
    double-stranded
   RNA, eaten by worm




(A)
                                                                                                      (B)
Figure 8–60 Gene function can be tested by RNA interference. (A) Double-
stranded RNA (dsRNA) can be introduced into C. elegans by feeding the worms
E. coli that express the dsRNA. (B) In a wild-type worm embryo, the egg and
sperm pronuclei (red arrowheads) come together in the posterior half of the
embryo shortly after fertilization. (C) In an embryo in which a particular gene has
been inactivated by RNAi, the pronuclei fail to migrate. This experiment revealed an
important but previously unknown function of this gene in embryonic development.      (C)
(B and C, from P. Gönczy et al., Nature 408:331–336, 2000. Reproduced with
permission of SNCSC.)                                                                                 20 µm

=== Original PDF page 573 ===
534    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                                                             Figure 8–61 RNA interference provides
                                                                                 a convenient method for conducting
                                                                              genome-wide genetic screens. In this
                                                                                                  experiment, each well in this 96-well plate
                                                                                                                                       is filled with E. coli that produce a different
                                                                                               double-stranded RNA than that produced
                                                 C. elegans                                          by E. coli in other wells. Each interfering                    each well contains
                           E. coli expressing        ADD TO WELLS IN PLATE                    RNA matches the nucleotide sequence of a
                    a different dsRNA                                                                    single C. elegans gene, thereby inactivating
                                                               96-well plate                                                    it. About 10 worms are added to each well,
                                                                                      where they ingest the genetically modified
                                                                                                             bacteria. The plate is incubated for
                                                                                                         several days, which gives the RNAs time
                                                                                                          to inactivate their target genes—and the
                                                                             worms time to grow, mate, and produce
                                                                                                                 offspring. The plate is then examined in
                                                                                       a microscope, which can be controlled
                                WORMS INGEST E. coli;                                     robotically, to screen for genes that affect
                                            RESULTING PHENOTYPES                             the worms’ ability to survive, reproduce,
                                      RECORDED AND ANALYZED                          develop, and behave. Shown here are
                                                                                            normal worms alongside worms that show
                                                                                     an impaired ability to reproduce because
                                                                                                              of inactivation of a particular “fertility” gene.
                                                                                           (From B. Lehner et al., Nat. Genet. 38:896–
                                                                                            903, 2006. With permission from Nature.)


                                   wild type              sterile


inducible promoter used, the RNAi can be produced only in a specified tissue
or only at a particular time in development, allowing the functions of the target
genes to be analyzed in elaborate detail.
  RNAi is a simple and efficient tool for analysis of gene function in many
organisms, but it has several potential limitations compared with true genetic
knockouts. For unknown reasons, RNAi does not efficiently inactivate all genes.
Moreover, within whole organisms, certain tissues may be resistant to the
action of RNAi (for example, neurons in nematodes). Another problem arises
because many organisms contain large gene families, the members of which
exhibit sequence similarity. RNAi therefore sometimes produces “off-target”
effects, inactivating related genes in addition to the targeted gene. One strat-
egy to avoid such problems is to use multiple small RNA molecules matched to
different regions of the same gene. Ultimately, the results of any RNAi experi-
ment must be viewed as a strong clue to, but not necessarily a proof of, normal
gene function.

Reporter Genes Reveal When and Where a Gene Is Expressed

We have just discussed some of the approaches that can be used to assess a gene’s
function in cultured cells or, even better, in the intact organism. Although this
information is crucial to understanding gene function, it does not generally reveal
the molecular mechanisms through which the gene product works in the cell. For
example, genetics on its own rarely tells us all the places in the organism where
the gene is expressed or how its expression is controlled. It does not necessarily
reveal whether the gene acts in the nucleus, the cytosol, on the cell surface, or
in one of the numerous other compartments of the cell. And it does not reveal
how a gene product might change its location or its expression pattern when the
external environment of the cell changes. Key insights into gene function can be
obtained by simply observing when and where a gene is expressed. A variety of
approaches, most involving some form of genetic engineering, can easily provide
this critical information.
   As discussed in detail in Chapter 7, cis-regulatory DNA sequences, located
upstream or downstream of the coding region, control gene transcription. These
regulatory sequences, which determine precisely when and where the gene is

=== Original PDF page 574 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  535


(A) STARTING DNA MOLECULES                                      EXPRESSION PATTERN        Figure 8–62 Using a reporter protein
                                                              OF GENE X             to determine the pattern of a gene’s
                                                                                             expression. (A) In this example, the                                  coding sequence                                         cells
                                       for protein X                  A  B  C  D   E   F      coding sequence for protein X is replaced
normal                                                                                 by the coding sequence for reporter
                                                                                                          protein Y. The expression patterns for X
    1        2        3                                                              and Y are the same. (B) Various fragments                                        start site for RNA                       pattern of normal gene X
          cis-regulatory                                     synthesis                                expression                      of DNA containing candidate cis-regulatory
      DNA sequences                                                                    sequences are added in combinations to
       that determine                    the                                                                                        produce test DNA molecules encoding      expression                of gene                  X         coding sequence for                                      cells
                                    reporter protein Y               A  B  C  D   E   F       reporter gene Y. These recombinant DNA
recombinant                                                                                   molecules are then tested for expression
                                                                                                                      after introducing them into a variety
    1        2        3                                                                         pattern of reporter gene Y     of different types of mammalian cells.
                                                                           expression                The results are summarized in (C). For
                                                                                              experiments in eukaryotic cells, two
                                                                                commonly used reporter proteins are
                                                               EXPRESSION PATTERN OF(B) TEST DNA MOLECULES                                                                           the enzyme β-galactosidase (β-gal)                                                               REPORTER GENE Y
                                                                                                      (see Figure 7–30) and green fluorescent
                                                                                                          protein (GFP) (see Figure 9–16).
                       3


             2


    1


    1        2

(C) CONCLUSIONS  —cis-regulatory sequence 3 normally turns on gene X in cell B
                    —cis-regulatory sequence 2 normally turns on gene X in cells D, E, and F
                    —cis-regulatory sequence 1 normally turns off gene X in cell D


expressed, can be easily studied by placing a reporter gene under their control
and introducing these recombinant DNA molecules into cells (Figure 8–62). In
this way, the normal expression pattern of a gene can be determined, as well
as the contribution of individual cis-regulatory sequences in establishing this
pattern.
   Reporter genes also allow any protein to be tracked over time in living cells.
Here, the reporter gene typically encodes a fluorescent protein, often green
fluorescent protein (GFP), the molecule that gives luminescent jellyfish their
greenish glow. The GFP is simply attached—in the coding frame—to the pro-
tein-coding gene of interest. The resulting GFP fusion protein often behaves in the
same way the normal protein does, and its location can be monitored by fluores-
cence microscopy, a topic that is discussed in the next chapter (see Figure 9–10).
GFP fusion has become a standard strategy for tracking not only the location but
also the movement of specific proteins in living cells.

In Situ Hybridization Can Reveal the Location of mRNAs and
Noncoding RNAs                                                                                                                    0.2 mm
It is also possible to directly observe the time and place that an RNA product of a     Figure 8–63 In situ hybridization to
gene is expressed using in situ hybridization. For protein-coding genes, this strat-   mRNAs reveals patterns of gene
egy often provides the same general information as the reporter gene approaches    expression during development.
described above; however, it is crucial for genes whose final product is RNA rather     Expression of specific regulatory genes
                                                                                                                                       is localized in the early Drosophila
than protein. We encountered in situ hybridization earlier in the chapter (see                                                                                         embryo, forming a series of stripes (see
Figure 8–32); it relies on the basic principles of nucleic acid hybridization. Typi-     Figures 7–29 and 7–30). In this image,
cally, tissues are gently fixed so that their RNA is retained in an exposed form that     expression of the genes eve (magenta)
can hybridize with a labeled complementary DNA or RNA probe. In this way, the    and ftz (green) has been revealed by in
patterns of differential gene expression can be observed in tissues, and the location      situ hybridization with differently colored
                                                                                                         fluorescent probes. DNA is lightly stained
of specific RNAs can be determined (Figure 8–63). An advantage of in situ hybrid-                                                                                                      with a white fluorescent dye to label all
ization over other approaches is that genetic engineering is not required. Thus, it is     nuclei in the embryo. (Courtesy of Erik
often simpler and faster and can be used for genetically intractable species.             Clark and Angela DePace.)

=== Original PDF page 575 ===
536    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


Figure 8–64 RNA levels can be measured by quantitative RT-PCR. The fluorescence measured
is generated by a dye that fluoresces only when bound to the double-strand DNA products of
the RT-PCR (see Figure 8–34). The red sample has a higher concentration of the mRNA being
measured than does the blue sample, because it requires fewer PCR cycles to reach the same
half-maximal concentration of double-stranded DNA. On the basis of this difference, the relative
amounts of the mRNA in the two samples can be precisely determined.
Expression of Individual Genes Can Be Measured Using                                                                                                   ﬂuorescence
Quantitative RT-PCR

Although reporter genes and in situ hybridization accurately reveal patterns of
gene expression, they are not the most powerful methods for quantifying amounts           time (number of PCR cycles)
of individual RNAs in cells. A more accurate method is based on the principles
of PCR. Called quantitative RT-PCR (reverse transcription–polymerase chain
reaction), this method begins with the total population of RNA molecules puri-
fied from a tissue or a cell culture. It is important that no DNA be present in the
preparation; it must be purified away or enzymatically degraded. Two DNA prim-
ers that specifically match the mRNA of interest are added, along with reverse
transcriptase, DNA polymerase, and the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates
needed for DNA synthesis. The first round of synthesis is the reverse transcription
of the RNA into DNA using one of the primers. Next, a series of heating and cool-
ing cycles allows the amplification of that DNA strand by PCR (see Figure 8–34).
The quantitative part of this method relies on a direct relationship between the
rate at which the PCR product is generated and the original concentration of the
mRNA species of interest. By adding chemical dyes to the PCR that fluoresce only
when bound to double-stranded DNA, a simple fluorescence measurement can
be used to track the progress of the reaction and thereby accurately deduce the
starting concentration of the mRNA that is amplified (Figure 8–64). This tech-
nique is relatively fast and simple to perform in the laboratory and is the preferred
method for accurate measurement of mRNA levels from a specific gene or small
group of genes. It is also used routinely to detect rare viral RNAs to determine if a
person is infected.

Global Analysis of mRNAs by RNA-seq Provides a Snapshot
of Gene Expression

As discussed in Chapter 7, a cell expresses only a subset of the many thousands of
genes available in its genome; moreover, this subset differs from one cell type to
another or, in the same cell, from one extracellular environment to the next. One
way to determine which genes are being expressed by a population of cells or a
tissue is to measure all of the RNAs that are being produced.
   Global sequencing of all RNAs, or RNA-seq, provides the most direct approach
for cataloging the RNAs produced by a cell or tissue. As mentioned earlier in this
chapter, this approach uses reverse transcriptase to copy all RNAs into cDNAs,
which are then fragmented and sequenced by next-generation sequencing meth-
ods such as Illumina sequencing (see Figure 8–44). More abundant RNAs will have
more cDNA copies, resulting in higher numbers of “sequence reads” for those
RNAs. Thus, as we have seen in Chapter 7 (see Figure 7–3), RNA-seq does not
simply identify the RNAs in a sample but also provides information about their
relative abundance. RNA-seq has other important benefits as well: it can detect
alternative RNA splicing, RNA editing, and the many noncoding RNAs produced
from a complex genome.
   Comprehensive studies of gene expression often provide information that
is useful for predicting gene function. Earlier in this chapter, we discussed how
identifying a protein’s interaction partners can yield clues about that protein’s
function. A similar principle holds true for genes: information about a gene’s
function can be deduced by identifying genes that share its expression pattern.
Using a computational approach called cluster analysis, one can identify sets
of genes that are coordinately regulated. Genes that are turned on or turned
off together under different circumstances are likely to work in concert in the

=== Original PDF page 576 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  537



                                                                                                                                    time
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                              15 min
                                                                                                                              30 min
                                                                                                                              1 h
                                                                                                                              2 h
                                                                                                                              3 h
                                                                                                                              4 h
                                                                                                                              8 h
                                                                                                                              12 h
                                                                                                                              16 h
                                                                                                                              20 h
                                                                                                                              24 h

           wound-healing genes            cell-cycle genes             cholesterol biosynthesis
                                                                       genes

Figure 8–65 Using cluster analysis to identify sets of genes that are coordinately regulated. Genes that have the same expression pattern are
likely to be involved in common pathways or processes. To perform a cluster analysis, gene expression data are obtained from cell samples exposed
to a variety of different conditions, and genes that show coordinate changes in their expression pattern are grouped together. In this experiment,
human fibroblasts were deprived of serum for 48 hours; serum was then added back to the cultures at time 0, and the cells were harvested for
mRNA measurements at different time points. Of the 8600 genes depicted here (each represented by a thin vertical line), just over 300 showed
threefold or greater variation in their expression patterns in response to serum reintroduction. Here, red indicates an increase in expression; green
is a decrease in expression. On the basis of the results of many other experiments, the 8600 genes have been grouped in clusters according to
similar patterns of expression. The results of this analysis show that genes involved in wound healing are turned on in response to serum, while
genes involved in regulating cell-cycle progression and cholesterol biosynthesis are shut down. (From M.B. Eisen et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
95:14863–14868, 1998. With permission from National Academy of Sciences.)


cell: they may encode proteins that are part of the same multiprotein machine
or proteins that are involved in a complex coordinated activity, such as DNA
replication or RNA splicing. Characterizing a gene of unknown function by
grouping it with known genes that share its transcriptional behavior is some-
times called “guilt by association.” Cluster analyses have been used to analyze
the gene expression profiles that underlie many interesting biological processes
(Figure 8–65).
   Major new insights into gene expression patterns have come from the develop-
ment of sensitive methods for sequencing RNA from single cells. In this method, a
complex tissue, tumor, embryo, or even organism is dissociated into single cells,
                                                                                             Figure 8–66 Using single-cell RNA-seq
after which microfluidics systems are used to separate the cell population into     to identify the cell types in a whole
individual cells in single droplets that are each processed for RNA-seq. Sophis-     animal. (A) The planarian flatworm is a
ticated computational methods are then used to process the vast quantities of     small (3–5 mm) model organism used in
sequence data. These methods include cluster analysis algorithms that categorize     studies of regeneration (see Figure 22–20).
                                                                                                                      (B) In this experiment, flatworms were cut incells into groups with similar gene expression patterns (Figure 8–66). The excit-                                                                                                      small pieces and dissociated into individual
ing outcome of these methods is a visualization of how individual cells fall into      cells. About 67,000 cells were analyzed
groups with similar expression patterns. In many cases, the cell groups identified    by single-cell RNA sequencing, providing
in this fashion can be identified as previously known cell types, thereby revealing    a complete list of all major mRNAs
                                                                                           expressed in every cell. Sophisticated
                                                                                                computational methods were then used to
                                                                                                               cluster cells into groups with similar gene
                                                                                                 expression patterns. These clusters are
                                                                                                                        typically displayed in two dimensions on
                                                                                       a plot as shown here, with each dot in a
                                                                                                               cluster representing a single cell. About
                                                                                 44 distinct cell types, highlighted with
                                                                                                                     distinct colors, were identified in this cluster
                                                                                                               analysis. The pattern of gene expression
                                                                                                                             in each cluster provides clues about the
                                                                                                         function of the cells in that cluster. Further
                                                                                                               insights can be obtained using in situ
                                                                                                             hybridization of intact flatworms, which
                                                                                                          reveals the precise location of cells and
                                                                                                          tissues expressing specific mRNAs from
                                                                                      each cluster. Such analyses reveal that cell
                                                                                                            clusters 2 and 3, for example, represent
                                                                                                                       cells from the epidermis. The end result
                                                                                                                                       is a comprehensive catalog of the genes
                                                                                           expressed in every major cell type of the
                                                                                                         animal’s body. (From C.T. Fincher
                                                                                                               et al., Science 360:eaaq1736, 2018.
  (A)                          (B)
           1 mm                                                                             With permission from AAAS.)

=== Original PDF page 577 ===
538    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


new clues about the genes expressed in those cells and even the function of those
                                                                                                                        transcription regulator A
cells. In other cases, this approach can reveal the existence of cell types that were
not previously known. Similar methods can be used to analyze gene expression
in distinct cell types during multiple stages of embryonic development, pro-                        gene 1     livingcell
viding comprehensive insights into cell lineage and gene expression patterns             transcription regulator B
during development.
                                                                                                            gene 2
Genome-wide Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Identifies Sites
on the Genome Occupied by Transcription Regulators                                   CROSS-LINK PROTEINS TO                                                                                 DNA WITH FORMALDEHYDE
We have discussed several strategies to measure the levels of individual RNAs in
a cell and to monitor changes in their levels in response to external signals. But                  LYSE CELLS
this information does not tell us how such changes are brought about. We saw               BREAK DNA INTO SMALL
in Chapter 7 that transcription regulators, by binding to cis-regulatory sequences                   (~200 NUCLEOTIDE)
                                                                                          FRAGMENTS
in DNA, are responsible for establishing and changing patterns of transcrip-
tion. Typically, these proteins do not occupy all of their potential cis-regulatory
                                                                                X      X
sequences in the genome under all conditions. For example, in some cell types,                                                                    +
the regulatory protein may not be expressed, or it may be present but lack an                                                                                 many other DNA fragments
obligatory partner protein, or it may be excluded from the nucleus until an appro-        that compose the rest of
priate signal is received from the cell’s environment. Even if the protein is present             the genome
in the nucleus and is competent to bind DNA, other transcription regulators or                   PRECIPITATE DNA USING
components of chromatin can occupy overlapping DNA sequences and thereby                 ANTIBODIES AGAINST                                                                                                      TRANSCRIPTION
occlude some of its cis-regulatory sequences in the genome.                                   REGULATOR A
   Chromatin immunoprecipitation provides a way to experimentally deter-
mine all the cis-regulatory sequences in a genome that are occupied by a given              X
transcription regulator under a particular set of conditions (Figure 8–67). In this                 REVERSE FORMALDEHYDE
approach, proteins are covalently cross-linked to DNA in living cells, the cells                   CROSS-LINKS;                                                                                       REMOVE PROTEIN
are broken open, and the DNA is mechanically sheared into small fragments.
Antibodies directed against a given transcription regulator are then used to
purify the DNA that became covalently cross-linked to that protein in the cell.
This DNA is then sequenced using the rapid methods discussed earlier; the                AMPLIFY THE PRECIPITATED                                                                                 DNA BY PCR
precise location of each precipitated DNA fragment along the genome is deter-
mined by comparing its DNA sequence to that of the whole genome sequence        DNA CORRESPONDING TO THOSE
(Figure 8–68). In this way, all of the sites occupied by the transcription regula-        POSITIONS IN THE GENOME THAT WERE
tor in the cell sample can be mapped across the cell’s genome. In combination           OCCUPIEDREGULATORBY TRANSCRIPTIONA IN THE CELLS
with RNA-seq information, chromatin immunoprecipitation can identify the key
transcriptional regulator responsible for specifying a particular pattern of gene                                                                                                   Figure 8–67 Chromatin immunoprecipitation.
expression.                                                                                        This method allows the identification of all
   Chromatin immunoprecipitation can also be used to deduce the  cis-     the sites in a genome that a transcription
regulatory sequences recognized by a given transcription regulator. Here, all the     regulator occupies in vivo. The identities of
                                                                                                    the precipitated, amplified DNA fragmentsDNA sequences precipitated by the regulator are lined up (by computer), and                                                                                                     are determined by DNA sequencing.
features in common are tabulated to produce the spectrum of cis-regulatory
sequences recognized by the protein (see Figure 7–10A). Chromatin immunopre-
cipitation is also used routinely to identify the positions along a genome that are
bound by the various types of modified histones discussed in Chapter 4. In this
case, antibodies specific to the particular histone modification are employed (see
Figure 8–68). A variation of the technique can also be used to map positions of
chromosomes that are in physical proximity (see Figure 4–53).

Ribosome Profiling Reveals Which mRNAs Are Being
Translated in the Cell

We have learned that there are several ways that RNA levels in the cell can be
monitored. But for mRNAs, this represents only one step in gene expression, and
we are often more interested in the final level of the protein produced by the gene.
As described earlier in this chapter, mass spectrometry can be used to monitor
the levels of all proteins in the cell, including modified forms of the proteins.
However, if we want to understand how synthesis of proteins is controlled by the
cell, we need to consider the translation step of gene expression.

=== Original PDF page 578 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  539


                               5000 nucleotide pairs                                            Figure 8–68 Chromatin
                                                                                          immunoprecipitations showing
                                                                                                proteins bound to the genomic
                                                                       Oct4                    region that controls expression of the
                                                                                  Oct4 gene. In this series of chromatin
                                                                                                  immunoprecipitation experiments,
                                                                                                      antibodies directed against a transcription
                                                                       Sox2                       regulator (first three panels) or a particular
                                                                                                     histone modification (fourth panel) were
                                                                                     used to precipitate bound, cross-linked
          reads                                                                         DNA. Precipitated DNA was sequenced,
                                                            Nanog                 and the positions across the genome
                                                                                       were mapped. (Only the small part of the
                                                                             mouse genome containing the Oct4 gene                sequence                                                                                                                                       is shown.) The results show that, in the
    of                                                                                    embryonic stem cells analyzed in these                                                 H3K4 trimethyl-lysine
                                                                                                  experiments, Oct4 binds upstream of
                                                                                                                                            its own gene, and Sox2 and Nanog are            number                                                                                 bound in close proximity. Oct4, Sox2,
                                                                                   and Nanog are key regulators in
                                                        RNA                   embryonic stem cells (discussed in
                                                                                           Chapter 22), and this experiment reveals
                                                                                                    the position on the genome through which
                                                                                                   they exert their effects on Oct4 expression.
        Oct4 gene                                                                                                 In the fourth panel, the positions of a                                                                          genomic
                                                           DNA              histone modification associated with
                                                                                                                  actively transcribed genes are shown (see                cis-regulatory      exon        intron
               sequences                                                                             Figure 4–35). Finally, the bottom panel
                                                                                 shows the RNA produced from the Oct4
                                                                                     gene under the same conditions used for
                                                                                                    the chromatin immunoprecipitations. Note
  An approach called ribosome profiling provides an instantaneous map of the     that the introns and exons are relatively
                                                                                           easy to identify from these RNA-seq data.
positions of ribosomes on each mRNA in the cell and thereby identifies those
mRNAs that are being actively translated. To accomplish this, total RNA from
a cell line or tissue is exposed to ribonucleases under conditions where only
those RNA sequences covered by ribosomes are spared. The protected RNAs are
released from ribosomes, converted to DNA, and the nucleotide sequence of each
is determined (Figure 8–69). When these sequences are mapped on the genome,
the positions of ribosomes across each mRNA species can be ascertained.
   Ribosome profiling has revealed many cases where mRNAs are abundant but
are not translated until the cell receives an external signal. It has also shown that
many open reading frames (ORFs) that were too short to be annotated as genes
are actively translated and probably encode functional, albeit very small, proteins
(Figure 8–70). Finally, ribosome profiling has revealed the ways that cells rapidly
and globally change their translation patterns in response to sudden changes in
temperature, nutrient availability, or chemical stress.

Recombinant DNA Methods Have Revolutionized Human Health

We have seen that nucleic acid methodologies developed in the past 40 years have
completely changed the study of cell biology. But they have also had a profound
effect on our day-to-day lives. Many pharmaceuticals in routine use (insulin,
human growth hormone, blood-clotting factors, and interferon, for example)
are based on cloning human genes and expressing the encoded proteins in large
amounts. As DNA sequencing continues to drop in cost, more and more individu-
als will elect to have their genome sequenced; this information can be used to
predict susceptibility to diseases (often with the option of minimizing this pos-
sibility by appropriate behavior) or to predict the way an individual will respond
to a given drug. The genomes of tumor cells from an individual can be sequenced
to determine the best type of anticancer treatment. And mutations that cause or
greatly increase the risk of disease continue to be identified at an unprecedented
pace. Using the recombinant DNA technologies discussed in this chapter, these
mutations can then be introduced into animals, such as mice, that can be studied
in the laboratory. The resulting transgenic animals, which often mimic some of

=== Original PDF page 579 ===
540    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                                                             Figure 8–69 Ribosome profiling. RNA
         AUG                                UGA       AAAAAAAAAAAA         is purified from cells and digested with a
                                                                                                   ribonuclease to leave only those portions
         AUG                                UGA       AAAAAAAAAAAA        of the mRNAs that are protected by a
                                                                                 bound ribosome. These short pieces
                                                                                                              of protected RNA (approximately 20
         AUG                                UGA       AAAAAAAAAAAA                                                                                                     nucleotides in length) are converted to DNA
                                                                                   and sequenced. The resulting information
         AUG                                UGA       AAAAAAAAAAAA         is displayed as the number of sequence
                                                                                              reads along each position of the genome.
                                                                                                                       In the diagram here, the data for only one
                                                 nuclease digestion
                                                                                             gene, whose mRNA is being efficiently
                                                                                                              translated, are shown. Ribosome profiling
                                                                                                   provides this type of information for every
                                                                mRNA produced by the cell.





                                          remove ribosomes
                                                 convert RNA to DNA and sequence





                                    map sequence reads on genome

                      gene being actively transcribed and translated

                                          numberreadsof
                                       position along genome



the phenotypic abnormalities associated with the condition in humans, can be
used to explore the cellular and molecular basis of the disease and to screen for
drugs that could potentially be used for human therapy.

Transgenic Plants Are Important for Agriculture

Recombinant DNA technology has had a profound impact on the study of plants.
In fact, certain features of plants make them especially amenable to recombinant
DNA methods.
  When a piece of plant tissue is cultured in a sterile medium containing nutri-
ents and appropriate growth regulators, some of the cells are stimulated to
proliferate indefinitely in a disorganized manner, producing a mass of relatively
undifferentiated cells called a callus. If the nutrients and growth regulators are
carefully manipulated, one can induce the formation of a shoot within the callus,
and in many species a whole new plant can be regenerated from such shoots. In a     Figure 8–70 Ribosome profiling can
                                                                                                          identify new genes. This experiment
                                                                                shows the discovery of a previously
                                                                                             unrecognized gene—one that encodes a
            known gene                              known gene                          protein of only 20 amino acids. At the top is
                                                                               shown a portion of a viral genome with two
                                                                                                          previously annotated genes. Below are the                                                                             200
                   ORF discovered through ribosome proﬁling                nucleotide pairs         results of a ribosome profiling experiment,
                         codes for a protein of 20 amino acids                                         displayed across the same section of the
                                                                                   genome, after human cells were infected
                                                                                       by the virus. The results show that the
                                                                                                           left-hand gene is not expressed under
  numberreadsof                                                                                           theseexpressedconditions,at low levels,the right-handand a previouslygene is
                                                                                             unrecognized gene that lies between them
                                         position along genome                                                       is expressed at high levels.

=== Original PDF page 580 ===
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION                                                  541


                                                                                             Figure 8–71 Transgenic plants can
                                                                             be made using recombinant DNA
                                                                   leaf discs incubated with                 techniques optimized for plants. A
                              discs removed from                  genetically engineered                      disc is cut out of a leaf and incubated in
                        tobacco leaf                     Agrobacterium for 24 h                  a culture of Agrobacterium that carries
                                                                                       a recombinant plasmid with both a
                                                                                                        selectable marker and a desired genetically
                                                                                               engineered gene. The wounded plant cells
                                                                                                               at the edge of the disc release substances
                                                                                                             that attract the bacteria, which inject their
                                                                   DNA into the plant cells. Only those plant
                                    callus                       selection medium allows                          cells that take up the appropriate DNA and
                                                          only plant cells that                         express the selectable marker gene survive
                                                    have acquired DNA from
                                                           the bacteria to                       and proliferate and form a callus. The
                                                                    proliferate                              manipulation of growth factors supplied to
                                                                                                    the callus induces it to form shoots, which
                                                                                               subsequently root and grow into adult
   shoot                                                                                                plants carrying the engineered gene.
                               shoot-inducing
                        medium



                                    transfer                 grow up
                                shoot to root-               rooted
                                 inducing                     seedling
                          medium

                                                                               adult tobacco plant
                                                                                  carrying transgene
                                                                               that was originally
                                                                             present in the
                                                                                      bacterial plasmid


number of plants—including tobacco, petunia, carrot, potato, and Arabidopsis—a
single cell from such a callus (known as a totipotent cell) can be grown into a small
clump of cells from which a whole plant can be regenerated (see Figure 7–2B).     Figure 8–72 DNA technology allows the
                                                                                          production of rice grains with high levels
Just as mutant mice can be derived by the genetic manipulation of embryonic                                                                                                   of b-carotene. To help reduce vitamin A
stem cells in culture, so transgenic plants can be created from plant cells trans-     deficiency in the developing world, a strain
fected with DNA in culture (Figure 8–71).                                                         of rice, called “golden rice,” was developed
   The ability to produce transgenic plants has greatly accelerated progress in      in which the edible part of the grain (called
many areas of plant cell biology. It has played an important part, for example,     the endosperm) contains large amounts
                                                                                                               of β-carotene, which is converted in the
in isolating receptors for growth regulators and in analyzing the mechanisms of                                                                            human gut to vitamin A. (A) Rice plants,
morphogenesis and of gene expression. These techniques have also opened up      like most other plants, can synthesize
many new possibilities in agriculture that could benefit both the farmer and the     β-carotene in their leaves from an abundant
consumer. They have made it possible, for example, to modify the ratio of lipid,     precursor (geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate)
                                                                                           found in all plant tissues. However, thestarch, and protein in seeds, to impart pest and virus resistance to plants, and                                                                                      genes that code for two of the enzymes
to create modified plants that tolerate extreme habitats such as salt marshes or     that act early in this biosynthetic pathway
water-stressed soil. One variety of rice has been genetically engineered to produce     are turned off in the endosperm, preventing
β-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A (Figure 8–72). If it replaced conventional     the production of β-carotene in rice grains.
rice, this “golden rice”—so called because of its yellow color—could help to    To produce golden rice, the genes for
                                                                                                these two enzymes were obtained from
                                                                                           organisms that produce large amounts of
                                                                                                   β-carotene: one from maize and the other
   (A)                                         (B)                               (C)                            from a bacterium. Using DNA technology,
   geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate                                                                  these genes were connected to a promoter
   (present in rice plant)                                                                                     that drives gene expression in rice
          enzyme 1 from maize                                                           endosperm. Using the method outlined
                                                                                                                             in Figure 8–71, this engineered DNA
                                                                              was then used to generate a transgenic     phytoene
                                                                                                                     rice plant that expresses these enzymes
          enzyme 2 from bacterium                                                                                 in endosperm, resulting in rice grains
                                                                                                             that contain high levels of β-carotene.
                                                                               Compared to the milled grains of wild-type     lycopene
                                                                                                                     rice (B), the grains of the transgenic rice are
          endogenous rice enzyme                                             10 mm         a deep yellow/orange due to the presence
                                                                                                               of β-carotene (C). (B and C, from J.A. Paine
                                                                                                               et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 23:482–487, 2005.
     β-carotene                                                                                    Reproduced with permission of SNCSC.)

=== Original PDF page 581 ===
542    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


alleviate severe vitamin A deficiency, which causes blindness in hundreds of
thousands of children in the developing world each year.

Summary

Genetics and genetic engineering provide powerful tools for understanding the func-
tion of individual genes in cells and organisms. In the classical genetic approach,
random mutagenesis is coupled with screening to identify mutants that are defi-
cient in a particular biological process. These mutants are then used to locate and
study the genes responsible for that process.
   Gene function can also be ascertained by reverse genetic techniques. DNA
engineering methods can be used to alter genes and to reinsert them into a cell’s
chromosomes so that they become a permanent part of the genome. If the cell used
for this gene transfer is a fertilized egg (for an animal) or a totipotent plant cell in
culture, transgenic organisms can be produced that express the mutant gene and
pass it on to their progeny. Especially important for cell and molecular biology is
the ability to alter cells and organisms in highly specific ways—allowing one to dis-
cern the effect on the cell or the organism of a designed change in a single protein or
RNA molecule. For example, genomes can be altered so that the expression of any
gene can be switched on or off by the experimenter.
  Many of these methods are being expanded to investigate gene function on
a genome-wide scale. The generation of mutant libraries in which every gene in
an organism has been systematically deleted, disrupted, or made controllable by
the experimenter provides invaluable tools for exploring the role of each gene in
the elaborate molecular collaboration that gives rise to life. Technologies such as
RNA-seq can monitor the expression of tens of thousands of genes simultaneously,
providing detailed, comprehensive snapshots of the dynamic patterns of gene
expression that underlie complex cell processes.

MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION
Quantitative experiments combined with mathematical theory mark the begin-
ning of modern science. Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and their contemporaries
did more than set out some rules of mechanics and offer an explanation of the
movements of the planets around the Sun: they showed how a quantitative math-
ematical approach could provide a depth and precision of understanding, at least
for physical systems, that had never before been dreamed to be possible.
  What is it that gives mathematics this almost magical power to explain the
natural world, and why has mathematics played so much more important a part
in physical sciences than in biology? What do biologists need to know about
mathematics?
   Mathematics can be viewed as a tool for deriving logical consequences from
propositions. It differs from ordinary intuitive reasoning in its insistence on rigor-
ous, accurate logic and the precise treatment of quantitative information. If the
initial propositions are correct, then the deductions drawn from them by math-
ematics will be true. The surprising power of mathematics comes from the length
of the chains of reasoning that rigorous logic and mathematical arguments make
possible, and from the unexpectedness of the conclusions that can be reached,
often revealing connections that one would not otherwise have guessed at. Revers-
ing the argument, mathematics provides a way to test experimental hypotheses: if
mathematical reasoning from a given hypothesis leads to a prediction that is not
true, then the hypothesis is not true.
   Clearly, mathematics is not much use unless we can frame our ideas—our
initial hypotheses—about the given system in a precise, quantitative form. A
mathematical edifice raised on a rickety or—even worse—a vague or overcompli-
cated set of propositions is likely to lead us astray. For mathematics to be useful,
we must focus our analysis on simple subsystems in which we can pick out key
quantitative parameters and frame well-defined hypotheses. This approach has
been used with great success in physics for centuries, but it has been less common

=== Original PDF page 582 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  543


in biology. But times are changing, and more and more it is becoming possible for             GENE X    GENE Y
biologists to exploit the power of quantitative mathematical analysis.
   In this final section of our methods chapter, we do not attempt to teach             GENE Z     GENE Z
readers every way in which mathematics can be fruitfully applied to biological
problems. Rather, we simply aim to give a sense of what mathematics and quan-     Figure 8–73 Diagrams that summarize
                                                                                         biochemical relationships. Here, a simple
titative approaches can do for us in modern biology. We focus primarily on the                                                                                                cartoon indicates that gene X represses
important principles that mathematics teaches us about the dynamics of molec-    gene Z (left) whereas gene Y activates gene
ular interactions and how mathematics can unveil surprising and useful features    Z (right).
of complex systems containing feedback. We will illustrate these principles using
the regulation of gene expression by transcription regulators like those discussed
in Chapter 7. The same principles apply to the post-transcriptional regulatory
systems that govern cell signaling (see Chapter 15), cell-cycle control (see Chap-
ter 17), and essentially all cell processes.

Regulatory Networks Depend on Molecular Interactions

Cell function and regulation depend on transient interactions among thousands
of different macromolecules in the cell. We often summarize these interactions
in this book with schematic cartoons. These diagrams are useful, but a complete
picture requires a deeper, more quantitative level of understanding. To meaning-
fully assess the biological impact of any interaction in the cell, we need to know
in precise terms how the molecules interact, how they catalyze reactions, and,
most important, how the behaviors of the molecules change over time. If a car-
toon shows that protein A activates protein B, for example, we cannot judge the
importance of this relationship without quantitative details about the concentra-
tions, affinities, and kinetic behaviors of proteins A and B.
   Let us begin by defining two different types of regulatory interaction in our
cartoons: one designating inhibition and the other designating activation. If the
protein product of gene X is a transcription repressor that inhibits the expression
of gene Z, we depict the relationship as a red bar-headed line (   ) drawn between
genes X and Z (Figure 8–73). If the protein product of gene Y is a transcription
activator that induces the expression of gene Z, then a green arrow (   ) is drawn
between genes Y and Z.
   The regulation of one gene’s expression by another is more complicated than
a single arrow connecting them, and a complete understanding of this regulation
requires that we tease apart the underlying biochemical processes. Figure 8–74A
sketches some of the biochemical steps in the activation of gene expression by a
transcription activator. A gene encoding the activator, designated as gene A, will
produce its product, protein A, via an RNA intermediate. This protein A will then
bind to pX, the regulatory promoter of gene X, to form the complex A:pX. Once
the A:pX complex forms, it stimulates the production of an RNA transcript that is
subsequently translated to produce protein X.
  We will focus here on the binding interaction that lies at the heart of this
regulatory system: the interaction between protein A and the promoter pX.
This interaction is reversible: any molecule of protein A that is bound to pX can
also dissociate from it. The steps represented by the green activation arrow in
Figure 8–74A include both the binding of A to pX and the dissociation of the com-
plex A:pX to re-form A and pX, as illustrated by the notation in Figure 8–74B. This
reaction notation is more informative than the diagrams in our figures but has its
own limitations. Suppose that the concentration of A increases by a factor of 10
as a response to an environmental input. If A increases, we intuitively know that
A:pX should increase too, but we cannot determine the amount of the increase
without additional information. We need to know the affinity of the binding inter-
action and the concentrations of the two binding partners. With this information
in hand, we can rigorously derive the answer.
   As discussed earlier and in Chapter 3 (see Figure 3–42), we know that the for-
mation of a complex between two binding partners, such as A and pX, depends
on a rate constant kon, which describes how many productive collisions occur
per unit time per protein at a given concentration of pX. The rate of complex

=== Original PDF page 583 ===
544    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


     SUDDEN                                                                                 Figure 8–74 A simple transcriptional
    ACTIVATING                                       kon                                               interaction. (A) Genes A and X each
      INPUT                      A + pX        A:pX                                  produce a protein, with the product of
                                                                     koff                                                                                    gene A serving as a transcription activator
           GENE A DNA                   rate of complex formation = kon[A][pX]                      to stimulate expression of gene X. As
                                                                                                        indicated by the green arrow, stimulation
                                               rate of complex dissociation = koff[A:pX]                 depends in part on the binding of protein                RNA
                                                                       A to the promoter region of gene X,
                                                  (B)                                                     designated as pX. (B) The binding of protein                      transcription
           A                      activator protein                                              A to the gene promoter is determined
                                               at steady state:                                     by the concentrations of the two binding
                                                                                                     partners (denoted as [A] and [pX], in units
                                                 kon[A][pX] = koff[A:pX]                                         of mol/liter, or M), the association rate
                                                                                                constant                                                                                                                                     of M–1 sec–1),                                                                                                               and                                                                                                                   kon (in units                                                        kon           A                                                 [A:pX] =                                                                [A][pX] = K[A][pX]     Equation 8–1           the                                                                                                              dissociation                                                                                                                              rate constant                                                                                                                                                     units                                                                                                                                                                                         koff (in                                                                      koff                GENE X DNA                                                                                                              of sec–1). (C) At steady state, the rates of
            promoter                         (C)                                                         association and dissociation are equal, and
                  (pX)                                                                                 the concentration of the bound complex is
                      RNA                                                              determined by Equation 8–1, in which the
                                               [pXT ] = [pX] + [A:pX]                                 two rate constants are combined in the
     (A)            X  protein            substituting [pX] from the above equation into               equilibrium constant K. (D) Equation 8–2
                                          Equation 8–1 yields:                                 can be derived to calculate the steady-
                                                                                                           state concentration of bound complex
                                                 [A:pX] = K[A]([pXT ] – [A:pX])                                    at a known total concentration of the
                                                                                           promoter [pXT ]. (E) Rearrangement of
                                                 [A:pX](1 + K[A]) = K[A][pXT ]                                                                                               Equation 8–2 yields Equation 8–3, which
                                                                                                     allows                                                                                                                    calculation                                                                                                                                  of                                                                                                                        the fraction                                                                                                                                                 of                                                     K[A]
                                                 [A:pX] =                                                                [pXT ]              Equation 8–2                                                                                           promoter                                                                                                           occupied                                                                                                               by protein                                                                                                                                         A.                                                                                                  pX that is                                               1 +                                                      K[A]

                                              (D)


                                                                   [A:pX]    K[A]                                     bound fraction =                                                        =                                                                           Equation 8–3
                                                               1 + K[A]                                                                  [pXT ]

                                                     (E)

formation equals the product of this rate constant kon and the concentrations of
A and pX (see Figure 8–74B). Complex dissociation occurs at a rate koff multiplied
by the concentration of the complex. The rate constant koff can differ by orders of
magnitude for different DNA sequences because it depends on the strength of the
noncovalent bonds formed between A and pX.
  We are primarily interested in understanding the amount of bound promoter
complex at equilibrium or steady state, where the rate of complex formation
equals the rate of complex dissociation. Under these conditions, the concentra-
tion of the promoter complex is specified by a simple equation that combines the
two rate constants into a single equilibrium constant K = kon/koff (Equation 8–1;
Figure 8–74C). K is sometimes called the association constant, Ka. The larger this
constant K, the stronger the interaction between A and pX. The reciprocal of K is
the dissociation constant, Kd.
   To calculate the steady-state concentration of the promoter complex using
Equation 8–1, we need to account for another complication: both A and pX exist in
two forms—free in solution and bound to each other. In most cases, we know the
total concentration of pX and not the free or bound concentrations, so we must find
a way to use the total concentration in our calculations. To do this, we first specify
that the total concentration of pX ([pXT ]) is the sum of the concentrations of free
([pX]) and bound ([A:pX]) forms (Figure 8–74D). This leads to a new equation that
allows us to use [pXT ] to calculate the steady-state concentration of the promoter
complex ([A:pX]) (Equation 8–2; Figure 8–74D).
   Protein A also exists in two forms: free ([A]) and bound to pX ([A:pX]). In a cell,
there are typically one or two copies of pX (assuming there is only one gene X per
haploid genome) and multiple copies of A. As a result, we can safely assume that
from the viewpoint of A, [A:pX] is negligible relative to the total [AT]. This means
[A] ≈ [AT], and we can just plug in the values of total [AT] in Equation 8–2 without
incurring appreciable error in the calculation of [A:pX].

=== Original PDF page 584 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  545


   Now, we are ready to determine the effects of increasing the concentration of
A. Suppose that K = 108 M–1, which is a typical value for many such interactions.
The starting concentration of A is [AT] = 10–9 M, and [pXT ] = 10–10 M (assuming
there is one copy of gene X in a haploid yeast cell, for example, with a volume of
around 2 × 10–14 L). Using Equation 8–2, we find that a tenfold increase in the
concentration of A causes the amount of promoter complex [A:pX] to increase 5.5-
fold, from 0.09 × 10–10 M to 0.5 × 10–10 M at steady state. The effects of a tenfold
increase in the concentration of A will vary dramatically depending on its starting
concentration relative to the equilibrium constant. Only through this mathemat-
ical approach can we achieve a thorough understanding of what these effects will
be and what impact they will have on the biological response.
   To assess the biological impact of a change in transcription activator levels,
it is also important in many cases to determine the fraction of the target gene
promoter that is bound by the activator, because this number will be directly
proportional to the activity of the gene’s promoter. In our case, we can calculate
the fraction of the gene X promoter, pX, that has protein A bound to it by rear-
ranging Equation 8–2 (Equation 8–3; Figure 8–74E). This fraction can be viewed
as the probability that promoter pX is occupied, averaged over time. It is also
equal to the average occupancy across a large population of cells at any instant
in time. When there is no protein A present, pX is always free, the bound frac-
tion is zero, and transcription is off. When [A] = 1/K, the promoter pX has a
50% chance of being occupied. When [A] greatly exceeds 1/K, the bound frac-
tion is almost equal to one, meaning that pX is fully occupied and transcription
is maximal.

Differential Equations Help Us Predict Transient Behavior

The most important and basic insights for which we, as biologists, depend on
mathematics concern the behavior of regulatory systems over time. This is the
central theme of dynamics, and it was for the solution of problems in dynamics
that the techniques of calculus were developed, by Newton and Leibniz, in the
seventeenth century. Briefly, the general problem is this: if we are given the rates
of change of a set of variables that characterize the system at any instant, how can
we compute its future state? The problem becomes especially interesting, and the
predictions often remarkable, when the rates of change themselves depend on
the values of the state variables, as in systems with feedback.
   Let us return to Equation 8–2 (Figure 8–74D), which tells us that when [A]
changes, [A:pX] at steady state will also change to a new concentration that we
can calculate with precision. However, [A:pX] does not change instantaneously to
this value. If we hope to understand the behavior of this system in detail, we must
also ask how long it takes [A:pX] to get to its new steady-state value inside the cell.
Equation 8–2 cannot answer this question. We need calculus.
   The most common strategy for solving this problem is to use ordinary differen-
tial equations. The equations that describe biochemical reactions have a simple
premise: the rate of change in the concentration of any molecular species X (that
is, d[X]/dt) is given by the balance of the rate of its appearance with that of its
disappearance. For our example, the rate of change in the concentration of the
bound promoter complex, [A:pX], is determined by the rates of complex assembly
and disassembly. We can incorporate these rates into the differential equation
shown in Figure 8–75A (Equation 8–4). When [A] changes, Equation 8–4 can be
solved to generate the concentration of [A:pX] as a function of time. Notice that
when kon[A][pX] = koff[A:pX], then d[A:pX]/dt = 0 and [A:pX] stops changing. At
this point, the system has reached the steady state.
   Calculation of all [A:pX] values as a function of time, using Equation 8–4, allows
us to determine the rate at which [A:pX] reaches its steady-state value. Because
this value is attained asymptotically, it is often most useful to compare the times
needed to get to 50%, 90%, or 99% of this new steady state. The simplest way to
determine these values is to solve Equation 8–4 with a method called numerical
integration, which involves plugging in values for all of the parameters (kon, koff,

=== Original PDF page 585 ===
546    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems




                                                                                4.5                                                                                                                                                                                   value)

                                                                                3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                 initial
                                                            of
                                                                                2.5
  d[A:pX]
        = rate of complex formation – rate of complex dissociation          1.5         PROMOTER-BOUND    dt                                                                           FRACTION AFTER A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (multiples
                                                                      TENFOLD INCREASE IN [A]
  d[A:pX]        = kon[A][pX] – koff[A:pX]     Equation 8–4                           0.5    dt                                                                                                                                          [A:pX]
                                                                     0 2 5  10     20     30     40
(A)                                                                                (B)               time (seconds)

Figure 8–75 Using differential equations to study the dynamics and steady-state behavior of
a biological system. (A) Equation 8–4 is an ordinary differential equation for calculating the rate of
change in the formation of bound promoter complex in response to a change in other components.
(B) Formation of [A:pX] after a tenfold increase in [A], as determined by solving Equation 8–4. In
blue is the solution corresponding to kon = 0.5 × 107 M–1 sec–1 and koff = 0.5 × 10–1 sec–1. In this
case, it takes [A:pX] about 5, 20, and 40 seconds to reach 50%, 90%, and 99% of the new steady-
state value. For the red curve, the kon and koff values are doubled, and the system reaches the
same steady state more rapidly.


etc.) and then using a computer to determine the values of [A:pX] over time, start-
ing from given initial concentrations of [A] and [pX]. For kon = 0.5 × 107 M–1 sec–1,
koff = 0.5 × 10–1 sec–1 (K = 108 M–1 as above), and [pXT ] = 10–10 M, it takes [A:pX]
about 5, 20, and 40 seconds to reach 50%, 90%, and 99% of the new steady-state
value after a sudden tenfold change in [A] (Figure 8–75B). Thus, a sudden jump in
[A] does not have instantaneous effects, as we might have assumed from looking
at the cartoon in Figure 8–74A.
   Differential equations therefore allow us to understand the transient dynamics
of biochemical reactions. This tool is critical for achieving a deep understanding
of cell behavior, in part because it allows us to determine the dependence of the
dynamics inside cells on parameters that are specific to the particular molecules
involved. For example, if we double the values of both kon and koff, then Equa-
tion 8–1 (Figure 8–74C) indicates that the steady-state value of [A:pX] does not
change. However, the time it takes to reach 50% of this steady state after a tenfold
change in [A] in our example changes from about 5 seconds to 2 seconds (see
Figure 8–75B). These insights are not accessible from either cartoons or equilib-
rium equations. This is an unusually simple example; mathematical descriptions
such as differential equations become more indispensable for understanding
biological interactions as the number of interactions increases.

Promoter Activity and Protein Degradation Affect the Rate
of Change of Protein Concentration

To understand our gene regulatory system further, we also need to describe the
dynamics of protein X production in response to changes in the amount of tran-
scription activator protein A. Here again, we use an ordinary differential equation
for the rate of change of protein X concentration—determined by the balance of
the rate of production of protein X through expression of gene X and the protein’s
rate of degradation.
   Let us begin with the rate of protein X production, which is determined pri-
marily by the occupancy of the promoter of gene X by protein A. The binding and
dissociation of a transcription regulator at a promoter generally occur on a much
faster time scale than transcription initiation, causing many binding and unbind-
ing events to occur before transcription proceeds. As a result, we can assume that
the binding reaction is at equilibrium on the time scale of transcription, and we
can calculate promoter occupancy by protein A using the equilibrium equation
discussed earlier (Equation 8–3; Figure 8–74E). To determine the transcription
rate, we simply multiply the occupied promoter fraction by a transcription rate
constant, b, that represents the binding of RNA polymerase and the subsequent

=== Original PDF page 586 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  547

                                                                                                                                             level 1.0                        K[A]
   transcription rate = β
                     1 + K[A]
                                 K[A]                                                                                      protein   protein production rate = β.m
                             1 + K[A]
                                                                           0.5
                                 [X]
   protein degradation rate =  τX                                              RESPONSE TIME                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  steady-state
                                                                     DEPENDENCE ON
 (A)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fraction  0            PROTEIN LIFETIME                                                                                       τ1  τ2         time
  d[X]      = protein production rate – protein degradation rate             (E)
   dt                                                                                         Figure 8–76 Effect of protein lifetime
                                                                             on the timing of the response. (A)
  d[X]      = β.m  K[A]   – [X]       Equation 8–5                                                    Equations for calculation of the rates of   dt        1 + K[A]    τX                                                               gene X transcription, protein X production,
                                                                                   and protein X degradation, as explained
(B)                                                                                                                          in the text. (B) Equation 8–5 is an ordinary
                                                                                                                             differential equation for calculating the
                                                                                                             rate of change in protein X in response to
   at steady state:                                                                        changes in other components. (C) When
               K[A]   [Xst] = β.m                          . τX         Equation 8–6                                                       the(steadyrate state),of changeits concentrationin protein X iscanzerobe            1             + K[A]
                                                                                                       calculated with Equation 8–6, revealing
                                                                                       a direct relationship with protein lifetime(C)
                                                                                                                                                      (τ). (D) The solution of Equation 8–5
                                                                                                             specifies the concentration of protein X
   [X](t) = [Xst](1 – exp(–t/τX))                                                                        over time as it approaches its steady-state
                                                                                                      concentration. (E) Response time depends
                                                                                  on protein lifetime. As described in the text,(D)
                                                                                                    the time that it takes a protein to reach
                                                                                       a new steady state is greater when the
steps that lead to production of mRNA and protein (Figure 8–76A). If each mRNA     protein is more stable. Here, the blue line
molecule produces, on average, m molecules of protein product, then we can     corresponds to a protein with a lifetime that
determine the protein production rate by multiplying the transcription rate by m       is 2.5-fold shorter than the lifetime of the
                                                                                                          protein in red.
(Figure 8–76A).
  Now let us consider the factors that influence protein X degradation and
its dilution due to cell growth. Degradation generally results in an exponential
decline in protein levels, and the average time required for a specific protein to be
degraded is defined as its mean lifetime, τ. In our current example, the rate of deg-
radation of protein X depends on its mean lifetime τX, which takes into account
active degradation as well as its dilution as the cell grows. The degradation rate
depends on the concentration of protein X and is calculated by dividing this con-
centration by the lifetime (see Figure 8–76A).
   With equations for rates of production and degradation in hand, we can now
generate a differential equation to determine the rate of change of protein X as a
function of time (Equation 8–5; Figure 8–76B). This equation can be solved by the
numerical methods mentioned earlier. According to the solution of this equation,
when transcription begins, the concentration of protein X rises to a steady-state
level at which the concentration of X is not changing anymore; that is, its rate of
change is zero. When this occurs, rearrangement of Equation 8–5 yields an equa-
tion that can be used to determine the steady-state value of X, [Xst] (Equation 8–6;
Figure 8–76C). An important concept emerges from the mathematics: the steady-
state concentration of a gene product is directly proportional to its lifetime. If
lifetime doubles, protein concentration doubles as well.

The Time Required to Reach Steady State Depends
on Protein Lifetime

We can see from Equation 8–6 (see Figure 8–76C) that when the concentration
of protein A rises, protein X increases to a new steady-state value, [Xst]. But this
cannot happen instantaneously. Instead, X changes dynamically according to
the solution of its differential rate equation (Equation 8–5). The solution of this
equation reveals that the concentration of X over time is related to its steady-state

=== Original PDF page 587 ===
548    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


concentration according to the equation in Figure 8–76D. Once again, mathe-
matics uncovers a simple but important concept that is not intuitively obvious:
after a sudden increase in [A], [X] rises to a new steady state at an exponential
rate that is inversely related to its lifetime; the faster X is degraded, the less time
it takes it to reach its new steady-state value (Figure 8–76E). The faster response
time comes at a higher metabolic cost, however, because proteins with a rapid
response time must be produced and degraded at a high rate. For proteins that
are not rapidly turned over, the response time is very long, and protein con-
centration is determined primarily by the dilution that results from cell growth
and division.

Quantitative Methods Are Similar for Transcription Repressors
and Activators

Positive control is not the only mechanism that cells use to regulate the expres-
sion of their genes. As we discussed in Chapter 7, cells also actively shut off genes,
often by employing transcription repressor proteins that bind to specific sites on
target genes, thereby blocking access to RNA polymerase. We can analyze the
function of these repressors by the same quantitative methods described above
for transcription activators. If a repressor protein R binds to the regulatory region
of gene X and represses its transcription, then the fraction of gene-binding sites
occupied by the repressor is specified by the same equation we used earlier
for the transcription activator (Figure 8–77A). In this case, however, it is only
when the DNA is free that RNA polymerase can bind to the promoter and tran-
scribe the gene. Thus, the quantity of interest is the unbound fraction, which can
be viewed as the probability that the site is free, averaged over multiple binding
and unbinding events. When the repressor concentration is zero, the unbound
fraction is 1 and the promoter is fully active; when the repressor concentration
greatly exceeds 1/K, the unbound fraction approaches zero. Figure 8–77B and
Figure 8–77C compare these relationships for a transcription activator and a
transcription repressor.



                                               K[R]
                      bound fraction =
                                        1 + K[R]

                                                              1
                      unbound fraction = 1 – bound fraction =
                                                            1 + K[R]

                           (A)

          1.0                                           1

                                                                                             Figure 8–77 How promoter occupancy
                                                                              depends on the binding affinity of a
                                                                                                    transcription regulator protein. (A) The                                                                                                                                                                                 fraction                                                     fraction of a binding site that is occupied by                      fraction          0.5                                                  0.5
                                                                                       a transcription repressor R is determined
                                                                 TRANSCRIPTION          by an equation that is similar to the one              bound                                                                  REPRESSOR          we used for a transcription activator (see                           TRANSCRIPTION                 unbound
                            ACTIVATOR                                                          Figure 8–74E), except that in the case of a
                                                                                                    repressor we are interested primarily in the
          0                                           0
      (B)       1/KA   concentration of protein A      (C)      1/KR  concentration of protein R         unbound fraction. (B) For a transcription
                                                                                                              activator A, half of the promoters are
                                                                                          occupied when [A] = 1/KA. Gene activity is
                                                                                                         proportional to this bound fraction. (C) For                                                      1                             protein production rate = β.m                                       a transcription repressor R, gene activity                                                    1 + K[R]
                                                                                                                                       is proportional to the unbound fraction
                                                                                                              of promoters. As indicated, this fraction
                             d[X]         1        [X]                            = β.m         –            Equation 8–7                                      is reduced to half of its maximal value                             dt        1 + K[R]    τX                                                                             when [R] = 1/KR. (D) As in the case of the
                                      1                                       [Xst] = β.m                                                         . τX                                                      transcriptionwe can deriveactivatorequationsA (seeto assessFigurethe8–76),                                    1 +                                            K[R]
                                                                                                        timing of protein X production as a function
                            (D)                                                                                of repressor concentrations.

=== Original PDF page 588 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  549


  We can create a differential equation that provides the rate of change in
protein X when repressor concentrations change (Equation 8–7; Figure 8–77D).
As in the case of the transcription activator, the steady-state concentration of pro-
tein X increases as its lifetime increases, but it decreases as the concentration of
the transcription repressor increases.

Negative Feedback Is a Powerful Strategy in Cell Regulation

Thus far, we have considered simple regulatory systems of just a few components.
In most of the complex regulatory systems that govern cell behaviors, multiple
modules are linked to produce larger circuits that we call network motifs, which
can produce surprisingly complex and biologically useful responses whose
properties become apparent only through mathematical analysis. A particularly
common and important network motif is the negative feedback loop, which can
have dramatically different functions depending on how it is structured.
  We take as a first example a network motif consisting of two linked mod-
ules (Figure 8–78A). Here, an input signal initiates the transcription of gene A,
which produces a transcription activator protein A. This activates gene R, which
synthesizes a transcription repressor protein R. Protein R in turn binds to the
promoter of gene A to inhibit its expression. This cyclical organization creates a
negative feedback loop that one can intuitively understand as a mechanism to
prevent proteins from accumulating to high levels. But what can we learn about
negative feedback loops, and their value in biology, by using mathematics to
model them?
   The negative feedback loop in Figure 8–78A can be modeled using Equa-
tion 8–7 (see Figure 8–77D) for the repression of gene A and Equation 8–5 (see
Figure 8–76B) for the activation of gene R. Thus, for proteins A and R, we use the
set of differential equations (Equation set 8–8) shown in Figure 8–78B. The two
equations in this set are coupled, which means that they must be solved together
to describe the behavior of A and R over time for any value of the input. As before,
we plug in values for the parameters (βR, τR, etc.) and then use a computer to          ACTIVATING                                                                                                   INPUT
determine the values of [A] and [R] as a function of time after a sudden input
activates gene A.                                                                                             GENE A
   The results reveal several important properties of negative feedback. First,
rather surprisingly, negative feedback increases the speed of the response to the
                                                                                    A
activating input. As shown in Figure 8–78C, the system with negative feedback
reaches its new steady state faster than the system with no feedback.                                                                                                  GENE R
   Second, negative feedback is useful for protecting cells from perturbations
that continually arise in the cell’s internal environment—due either to random
                                                                                                         R
variations in the birth and death of molecules or to fluctuations in environmen-      (A)
tal variables such as temperature and nutritional supplies. Let us imagine, for
example, that βA, the transcription rate constant for gene A, fluctuates by 25% of
its value and ask whether and how much the levels of protein R are affected. The        d[A]    βA.mA     [A]
                                                                                            =           –
results, shown in Figure 8–79, reveal that a change in βA causes a smaller change         dt    1 + KR[R]    τA
in the steady-state value of R when the network has negative feedback.
                                                                                                                d[R]           KA[A]      [R]                                                                                            = βR.mR           –                                                                                                          dt          1 + KA[A]    τR
Delayed Negative Feedback Can Induce Oscillations                                                Equation set 8–8
A beautiful thing happens when a negative feedback loop contains some delay                                                                                                                         (B)
mechanism that slows the feedback signal through the loop: rather than gen-
erating a new stable state as in a rapid negative feedback loop, a delayed loop


                                                                                                    1
Figure 8–78 A simple negative feedback motif. (A) Gene A negatively regulates its own                                     levelexpression by activating gene R. The product of gene R is a transcription repressor that inhibits                                                 steady-state
gene A. (B) Equation set 8–8 can be solved to determine the dynamics of system components over     oftime. (C) A system with negative feedback (blue) reaches its steady state faster than a system with                          protein  0.5
no feedback (red). The plots indicate the levels of protein A, expressed as a fraction of the steady-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fractionstate level. The blue line reflects the solution of Equation set 8–8, which includes negative feedback
of gene A by the repressor R. The red line represents the solution when the rate of synthesis of A              0
was set to a constant value that is unaffected by the repressor R.                                              (C)                     time

=== Original PDF page 589 ===
550    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


                                                                                             Figure 8–79 The effect of fluctuations
   R                  R                                                     in kinetic rate constants on a system
                                                                                             with negative feedback compared to                  protein                                                                                                                               protein                                     one without feedback. The plot at left
     of                                    of                                               represents the levels of protein R after a
                                                                                    sudden activating stimulus, according to
                                                                                                    the regulatory scheme in Figure 8–78A and
                                                                                            determined by the solution of Equation set
                           WITH                            NO               8–8 (see Figure 8–78B). A perturbation was                                  concentration                   FEEDBACK                                                   concentration                    FEEDBACK             induced by changing βA from 4 M/min (red
                                                                                                                                      line) to 3 M/min (blue line). The plot at right
                        time                                        time                     shows the results when negative feedback
                                                                              was removed. The system with negative
                                                                                          feedback deviates less from its normal
                                                                                                    operation as β changes than does the
generates pulses, or oscillations, in the levels of its components. This can be seen,    system with no feedback. Notice that, as
for example, if the number of components in a negative feedback loop increases,      in Figure 8–78C, the system with negative
which leads to delays in the amount of time required for the cycle of signals to be     feedback also reaches its steady state
completed. Figure 8–80 compares the behavior of two network motifs—one with    more rapidly.
a three-stage and one with a five-stage negative feedback loop. Using the same
kinetic parameters at each stage in the two loops, one finds that stable oscillations
arise in the longer loop, while in the shorter loop the same parameters lead to
relatively rapid convergence to a stable steady state.
   Changes in the parameters of a delayed negative feedback loop—binding
affinities, transcription rates, or protein stabilities, for example—can change the
amplitude and period of the oscillations, providing a remarkably versatile mecha-
nism for generating all sorts of oscillators that can be used for various purposes in
the cell. Indeed, many naturally occurring oscillators, including the calcium oscil-
lators described in Chapter 15 and the cell-cycle network described in Chapter
17, use delayed negative feedback as the basis for biologically important oscilla-
tions. Not all of the oscillations observed in cells are thought to have a function,
however. Oscillations become inevitable in a highly complex, multicomponent
biochemical pathway such as glycolysis, due simply to the large number of feed-
back loops that appear to be required for its regulation.



ACTIVATING
   INPUT                                                                                             X
                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                        Z
        GENE X       GENE Y       GENE Z


         X           Y              Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         concentration

(A)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                protein


                                                                                                             (B)                   time

ACTIVATING
   INPUT


       GENE V       GENE W       GENE X       GENE Y       GENE Z


         V       W           X           Y              Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       concentration

(C)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               protein
Figure 8–80 Oscillations arising from delayed negative feedback. A transcriptional
circuit with three components (A, B) is less likely to oscillate than a transcriptional circuit
with five components (C, D). The X (light blue), Y (dark blue), and Z (brown) here represent                          time
transcription regulatory proteins. For the simulations in panels B and D, the system was        (D)
initiated from random initial conditions for X, Y, and Z. Oscillations are produced by a delay
induced as the signal propagates through the loop.

=== Original PDF page 590 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  551


                                                                                              Figure 8–81 How the cooperative
                       (KA[A])h                        (KR[R])h                                         binding of transcription regulatory
  bound fraction =              for activators, or              for repressors
                 1 + (KA[A])h                1 + (KR[R])h                                          proteins affects the fraction of
                                                                                     promoters bound. (A) Cooperativity is
 (A)                                                                                                incorporated into our mathematical
                                                                                      models by including a Hill coefficient (h)
     1                                                  1                                                         in the equations used previously to        h=6
                     h=2                                                                     determine the fraction of bound promoter         h=3
                           h=1                                                                   (see Figures 8–74E and 8–77A). When h
                                                                                                                                       is 1, the equations shown here become                                                                                                                                                                        fractionfraction    0.5                                                          0.5                                                    identical to the equations used previously,
                             ACTIVATOR                                  REPRESSOR     and there is no cooperativity. (B) The
                                                                                                                                               left                                                                                                    panel depicts                                                                                                     a cooperatively                                                                                                           bound                                                 h=6bound                                                                                                                                            unbound                                                                        h=1                                                                                                              transcription                                                                                                                                    activator,                                                                                                     and the right                                                                                                                                  panel
                                                    h=3         h=2                       depicts a cooperatively bound transcription
                                                 0    0                                                                                                           repressor. Recall from Figure 8–77B that                                                            1/KR      concentration of protein R         1/KA    concentration of protein A (B)                                                                                  gene activity is proportional to bound
                                                                                                               activator (left panel) or unbound repressor
                                                                                                                              (right panel). Note that the plots get
DNA Binding by a Repressor or an Activator Can Be Cooperative       steeper as the Hill coefficient increases.

We have focused thus far on the binding of a single transcription regulator to a
single site in a gene promoter. Many promoters, however, contain multiple adja-
cent binding sites for the same transcription regulator, and it is not uncommon for
these regulators to interact with each other on the DNA to form dimers or larger
oligomers. These interactions can result in a cooperative form of DNA binding,
such that DNA-binding affinity increases at higher concentrations of the tran-
scription regulator. Cooperativity produces a steeper transcriptional response
to increasing regulator concentration than the response that can be generated
by the binding of a monomeric protein to a single site. A steep transcriptional
response of this sort, when present in conjunction with positive feedback, is an
important ingredient for producing systems with the ability to switch between
different discrete phenotypic states. To begin to understand how this occurs, we
need to modify our equations to include cooperativity.
   Cooperative binding events can produce steep S-shaped (or sigmoidal) rela-
tionships between the concentration of regulatory protein and the amount bound
on the DNA (see Figure 7–11 and Figure 15–17). In this case, a number called
the Hill coefficient (h) describes the degree of cooperativity, and we can include
this coefficient in our equations for calculating the bound fraction of promoter
(Figure 8–81A). As the Hill coefficient increases, the dependence of binding on
protein concentration becomes steeper (Figure 8–81B). In principle, the Hill
coefficient is similar to the number of molecules that must come together to gen-
erate a reaction. In practice, however, cooperativity is rarely complete, and the
Hill coefficient does not reach this number.

Positive Feedback Is Important for Switchlike Responses
and Bistability

We turn now to positive feedback and its very important consequences. First and
foremost, positive feedback can make a system bistable, enabling it to persist in
either of two (or more) alternative steady states. The idea is simple and can be
conveyed by drawing an analogy with a candle, which can exist either in a burn-
ing state or in an unlit state. The burning state is maintained by positive feedback:
the heat generated by burning keeps the flame alight. The unlit state is maintained
by the absence of this feedback signal: so long as sufficient heat has never been
applied, the candle will stay unlit.
   For the biological system, as for the candle, bistability has an important corol-
lary: it means that the system has a memory, such that its present state depends
on its history. If we start with the system in an Off state and gradually rack up the
concentration of the activator protein, there will come a point where autostimula-
tion becomes self-sustaining (the candle lights), and the system moves rapidly to
an On state. If we now intervene to decrease the level of activator, there will come
a point where the same thing happens in reverse, and the system moves rapidly

=== Original PDF page 591 ===
552    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


        ACTIVATING            ACTIVATING               ACTIVATING                         Figure 8–82 Positive feedback of a gene
           INPUT                 INPUT                     INPUT                         onto itself through serially connected
                                                                                                       interactions. A sequence of activators and
          (A)     GENE X           (B)     GENE X               (C)     GENE X                      repressors of any length can be connected
                                                                                                          to produce a positive feedback loop, as
                                                                                                  long as the overall sign is positive. Because
                X                  X                     X                         the negative of a negative is positive, not
                                                                                                       only circuit (A) and (B) but also circuit
                                        GENE Y                 GENE Y                 (C) create positive feedback.


                                         Y                     Y


back to an Off state. But the transition points for switching on and switching off
are different, and so the current state of the system depends on the route by which
it has been taken in the past—a phenomenon called hysteresis.
  A simple case of positive feedback can be seen in a regulatory system in which
a transcription regulator activates (directly or indirectly) its own expression, as
in Figure 8–82A. Positive feedback can also arise in a circuit with many interven-
ing repressors or activators, so long as the net overall effect of the interactions is     Figure 8–83 A graphical nullcline
                                                                                                     analysis. (A) X inhibits Y and Y inhibits X,
activation (Figure 8–82B and C).                                                                                                                 resulting in a positive feedback loop.
   To illustrate how positive feedback can generate stable states, let us focus      (B) Equation set 8–9 can be used to
on a simple positive feedback loop containing two repressors, X and Y, each of     determine the rate of change in the
which inhibits expression of the other (Figure 8–83A). As we saw with Equation     concentrations of proteins X and Y.
set 8–8 (Figure 8–78B) earlier, we can create differential equations describing the      (C) Equations 8–10 and 8–11 provide
                                                                                                    the concentrations of proteins X and Y,
rate of change of [X] and [Y] (Equation set 8–9; Figure 8–83B). We can further      respectively, when these concentrations
modify these equations to include cooperativity by adding Hill coefficients. As     reach a steady state. (D, E) Blue curves
we did earlier, we can then create equations for calculating the concentrations of      (called nullclines) are plots of [Xst]
[X] and [Y] when the system reaches a steady state—that is, when (d[X]/dt) = 0     calculated from Equation 8–10 over a
                                                                                            range of concentrations of [Yst]. Red curvesand (d[Y]/dt) = 0 (Equations 8–10 and 8–11, Figure 8–83C).                                                                                                     are nullclines that indicate values of [Yst]
   Equations 8–10 and 8–11 can be used to carry out an intriguing mathemati-     calculated from Equation 8–11 over a range
cal procedure called a nullcline analysis. These equations define the relationships      of concentrations of [Xst]. At an intersection
between the concentration of X at steady state, [Xst], and the concentration of Y at      of the two lines, both [X] and [Y] are at
steady state, [Yst], which must be simultaneously satisfied. We can plug in differ-     steady state. For plot D, the binding of both
                                                                                                        proteins to their target gene promoters
ent values for [Yst] in Equation 8–10 and calculate the corresponding [Xst] for each                                                                              was cooperative (hX and hY much larger
of these values. We can then graph [Xst] as a function of [Yst]. Next, we repeat the     than 1), resulting in the presence of
process by varying [Xst] in Equation 8–11 to graph the resulting [Yst]. The inter-     multiple intersections of the nullclines––
sections of these two graphs determine the theoretically possible steady states of     suggesting that the system can assume
the system. For systems in which the Hill coefficients hX and hY are much larger     multiple discrete steady states. In plot E,                                                                                                    the binding of protein X to the promoter of
than 1, the lines in the two graphs intersect at three locations (Figure 8–83D). In                                                                                    gene Y was not cooperative (hX close to 1),
other systems that have the same arrangement of regulators but different param-      resulting in only one nullcline intersection
eters, there might only be one intersection, indicating the presence of only a single    and thus just one likely steady state.


        GENE X
                                 d[X]             1          [X]           Y                               = βX.mX              –                          of                                 dt          1 + (KY[Y])hY     τX
         X                                                  Equation set 8–9
                                 d[Y]             1          [Y]                               = βY.mY              –             GENE Y         dt          1 + (KX[X])hX     τY                                   (B)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             concentration
               Y
                                                 1                                          concentration of X(A)                                        [X]st = βX.mX.τX                    Equation 8–10        (D)
                                            1 + (KY[Yst])hY

                                                 1               Y
                                                                 Equation 8–11                                           [Y]st = βY.mY.τY                                                                            of                                            1 + (KX[Xst])hX

                                   (C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               concentration


                                                                                                   concentration of X
                                                                                                              (E)

=== Original PDF page 592 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  553


                                                                                             Figure 8–84 Analysis of the stability
                                                                                                   of a system’s steady states. (A) The
  Y                   Y                                              dotted lines are the nullclines for the
    of                                      of             2                             system shown in Figure 8–83. Also shown
                                                          1                                     are dynamic trajectories (green) that
                                                                              show the changes over time in [X] and
                                                                                                                                       [Y], starting at a variety of different initial
                                                                                                   concentrations (determined by solution of                        concentration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     concentration                                             Equation set 8–9; see Figure 8–83B). By
                                                                                                                 plotting [X] versus [Y] at each time point,
                                                                       we find that, although there are three
                                                                                                     possible steady states in this system, the
                   concentration of X                                                                 concentration of X                 dynamic trajectories converge on only      (A)                                                                (B)
                                                                                     two of them. The middle steady state is
                                                                                                  avoided: it is unstable, being unable to
steady state. For example, when there is a low cooperativity of protein X binding      attract any trajectories. (B) Imagine that
to the promoter of gene Y (that is, a small Hill coefficient, hX, in Equation 8–11),     the system is at the upper-left steady state
the plot of [Y] is less curved (Figure 8–83E), and it is less likely that there will be    and experiences a perturbation (black
                                                                                                        arrows), such as a random fluctuation in
multiple intersections of the two curves.                                                                                                    the production rates of X and/or Y. If the
  We emphasized earlier that positive feedback typically generates a bistable sys-     perturbation is small (arrow 1), the system
tem with two stable steady states. Why does the system modeled in Figure 8–83D       will return to the same steady state. On
have three? This conundrum can be explained by solving the reaction rate equa-     the other hand, a perturbation that drives
                                                                                                    the system beyond the unstable (middle)tions (Equation set 8–9; Figure 8–83B) for various different starting conditions of                                                                                               steady state (arrow 2) causes it to switch
[X] and [Y], determining all values of [X] and [Y] as a function of time. Starting with     to the lower-right steady state. The set of
each set of initial concentrations of [X] and [Y], these calculations produce a so-     perturbations that a system can withstand
called trajectory of points, each indicated by a curved green line on Figure 8–84A.     without switching from one steady state
A fascinating pattern emerges: each trajectory moves across the plot and settles in     to the other is known as the region of
                                                                                                                attraction of that steady state.one of two steady states, but never in the third (middle steady state). We conclude
that the middle steady state is unstable because it cannot “attract” any trajecto-
ries. The system therefore has only two stable steady states. Thus, the number of
stable steady states in a system need not be equal to the total number of its theo-
retically possible steady states. In fact, stable steady states are usually separated
by unstable ones, as in our example.
   Once this system adopts a fate by settling in one of the two steady states, does
it have the ability to switch to the other state? The numerical solution of Equation
set 8–9 can again provide an answer. In Figure 8–84B, we show the solution of this
equation set for two perturbations from the upper-left steady state. For a small
perturbation, the system returns to its original steady state. But the larger pertur-
bation causes the system to switch to the alternate steady state. Thus, this system
can be switched from one stable steady state to the other by subjecting it to an
input (or a perturbation) that is large enough to make the other steady state more
attractive. More generally, every stable steady state has a corresponding region of
attraction, which can be intuitively thought of as the range of perturbations (of [X]
or [Y] in this example) for which the dynamic trajectories converge back to that
particular steady state, rather than switch to the other one.
   The concept of a region of attraction has interesting implications for the heri-
tability of transcriptional states and the transition rates between them. If the
region of attraction around one steady state is large, for example, then most cells
in the population will assume this particular state. Furthermore, this state is likely
to be inherited by daughter cells, because minor perturbations, like those ensuing
from an asymmetric distribution of molecules during cell division, will rarely be
sufficient to induce switching to the other steady state. We should expect that the
use of positive feedback, coupled to cooperativity, will quite often be associated
with systems requiring stable cell memory.

Robustness Is an Important Characteristic of Biological Networks

Biological regulatory systems are exposed to frequent and sometimes extreme
variations in external conditions or the concentrations or activities of key com-
ponents. The ability of these systems to function normally in the face of such
perturbations is called robustness. If we understand a complex system to the
extent that we can reproduce its behavior with a computational model, then the

=== Original PDF page 593 ===
554    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


robustness of the system can be assessed by determining how well its normal
function persists after changes in various parameters, such as rate constants and
component concentrations. We have already seen, for example, how the presence
of negative feedback reduces the sensitivity of the steady state to changes in the
values of the system’s parameters (see Figure 8–79). Considerations of robustness
also apply to dynamic behaviors. Thus, for example, when discussing negative
feedback, we described how the behavior of a system tends to become more oscil-
latory as the number of components that constitute the feedback loop increases.
If we use different values of the parameters in models derived for systems like
those in Figure 8–80, we find that the system with the longer loop tends to exhibit
stable oscillations within a much broader range of parameters, indicating that this
system provides a more robust oscillator. We can perform similar calculations to
determine the ability of different systems to achieve robust bistability arising from
positive feedback. Thus, one benefit of computational models is that they allow us
to probe the robustness of biological networks in a systematic and rigorous way.

Two Transcription Regulators That Bind to the Same Gene
Promoter Can Exert Combinatorial Control

Thus far, we have discussed how one transcription regulator can modulate the
expression level of a gene. Most genes, however, are controlled by more than one
type of transcription regulator, providing combinatorial control that allows two or
more inputs to influence the expression of one gene. We can use computational
methods to unveil some of the important regulatory features of combinatorial
control systems.
   Consider a gene whose promoter contains binding sites for two regulatory pro-
teins, A and R, which bind to their individual sites independently. There are four
possible binding configurations (Figure 8–85A). Suppose that A is a transcrip-
tion activator, R is a transcription repressor, and the gene is only active when A is
bound and R is not bound. We learned earlier that the probability that A is bound
and the probability that R is not bound can be determined by the equations in
Figure 8–86A. The product of these two probabilities gives us the probability of
gene activation.
   This example illustrates an AND NOT logic function (A and not R) (see
Figure 8–85A). Maximal activation of this gene is accomplished when [A] is high
and [R] is zero. However, intermediate levels of gene activation are also possible
depending on the levels of A and R and also on the binding affinities of A and R
for their respective sites (that is, KA and KR). When KA > KR, a small concentration
of A is capable of overcoming repression by R. Conversely, if KA < KR, then much
more A is needed to activate the gene (Figure 8–86B and C).
  Many other logic functions can govern combinatorial gene regulation. For
example, an AND logic gate results when two activators, A1 and A2, are both
                                                                                             Figure 8–85 Combinatorial control of
required for a gene to be transcribed (Figure 8–85B and Figure 8–86D). In E.    gene expression. There are many ways in
coli cells, the AraJ gene controls some aspects of arabinose sugar metabolism: its    which gene expression can be controlled
                                                                                       by two transcription regulators. To define
                                                                                                            precisely the relationship between the
                                                                                     two inputs and the gene expression output,
  A   R             A                                           R                 a regulatory circuit is often described as a
                          R             A   R             A                          specific type of logic gate, a term borrowed
          GENE               GENE                GENE               GENE         from electronic circuit design. A simple
            OFF                  OFF                  OFF              ON         example is the OR logic gate (not shown
(A)                                                                                                             here), in which a gene is controlled by
                                                      AND NOT logic        two transcription activators, and one or the
                                                                                                     other can activate gene expression. (A) In
                                                                                       a system with an activator A and repressor
                                                                                                 R, if transcription is turned on only when A  A1  A2              A1                                          A2
                                                                                                                                       is bound and R is not, then the result is an
                          A2              A1  A2              A1
                                                                   AND NOT logic gate. We saw an example
          GENE               GENE                GENE               GENE                                                                                                              of this logic in Chapter 7 (Figure 7–18).
            OFF                  OFF              ON                  OFF             (B) An AND gate results when two
                                                                                                              transcription activators, A1 and A2, are
(B)                                       AND logic                                 both required to turn on a gene.

=== Original PDF page 594 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  555


                                                                                             Figure 8–86 How the quantitative
                                 KA[A]                                                        output of a gene depends on both its
            fraction of A bound =
                             1 + KA[A]                                                        combinatorial logic and the affinities
                                                                                                   of transcription regulators. (A) In a
                                   1                                                              combinatorial gene regulatory system like            fraction of R not bound =
                                1 + KR[R]                                                               that illustrated in Figure 8–85A, the fraction
                                                                                                               of promoters bound by activator A and the
           P(A,R) =                    KA[A]   .    1    =            KA[A]                                                fraction not bound by repressor R are each
                 1 + KA[A]  1 + KR[R]   1 + KA[A] + KR[R] + KAKR[A][R]                              determined as shown here. The product of
                                                                                                these probabilities provides the probability,
          (A)                                                                                          P(A, R), that a gene promoter is active.
                     KA > KR                               KA < KR                           (B–E) In these four panels, red indicates
                                                                                                   high gene expression and blue indicates
                                                                                           low gene expression. (B, C) Depictions of
    R                  R                                       gene expression from the system described
       of                                   of                                                          in panel A. The two panels demonstrate
                                                                          how the system behaves when the relative
                                                                                                                                    affinities of the two transcription regulators
                                                                                     change as indicated above each panel.
                                                                                                                    (D) Gene expression in a case where the                                              concentration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     concentration
                                                                                     gene turns on only at high levels of both
                                                                                                               activating inputs (A1 and A2), as shown
                   concentration of A                           concentration of A          (B)                                                (C)                                                          in Figure 8–85B. (E) Experimental data
                                                                                        showing measured expression of a gene
                                                      EXPERIMENTAL VALUES                                                                                                                             in E. coli that is combinatorially regulated
                                                      20                                  by two inputs: arabinose and cAMP.
       A1                                                                              Note the close resemblance to panel D.
       of                                                                                                             (E, adapted from S. Kaplan et al., Mol. Cell
                                                                                               (mM)  6                                    29:786–792, 2008. With permission from
                                                                                                                          Elsevier.)
                                                                                               cAMP                                              concentration                                                       1
                                                                0.02            1.3     43
                   concentration of A2
          (D)                                                      (E)          arabinose (mM)


expression requires two transcription regulators, one activated by arabinose and
the other activated by the small molecule cAMP (Figure 8–86E).

An Incoherent Feed-forward Interaction Generates Pulses

Imagine that a sudden input signal immediately activates a transcription activator
A and that the same input signal induces the much slower synthesis of a tran-
scription repressor protein R that acts on the same gene X. If A and R control gene
expression by an AND NOT logic function like that described above, our intuition
tells us that this system should be able to generate a pulse of transcription: when
A is activated (and R is absent), the transcription of gene X will begin and cause
an increase in the concentration of protein X, but then transcription will shut off
when the concentration of R increases to a sufficiently high value.
   Arrangements of this type are common in the cell. In E. coli, for example, galac-
tose metabolic genes are positively regulated by the catabolite activator protein
(CAP), which is activated at high levels of cAMP. The same genes are repressed
by the GalS repressor protein, which is encoded by a gene whose transcription is
likewise activated by CAP. Thus, an increase in input (cAMP) activates A (CAP),
and transcription of the galactose genes begins. But activation of A also causes
a subsequent buildup of R (GalS), which causes the same genes to be repressed
after a delay. This results in an incoherent feed-forward motif (Figure 8–87A).
   The response of the incoherent feed-forward motif will vary, depending on the
parameters of the system. Suppose, for example, that the transcription activator
protein A binds more weakly to the gene regulatory region than does the tran-
scription repressor protein R (KA << KR). In this case, there will be a transient
burst of protein synthesized by the affected gene (gene X) in response to a sudden
activating input (Figure 8–87B). In contrast, the output will be more sustained if
KA is much larger than KR, because the repression will be too weak to overcome

=== Original PDF page 595 ===
556    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


     SUDDEN                                  KA << KR                                       KA >> KR
    ACTIVATING
       INPUT
                                                                                                                      protein X output
    A    A
    inactive                                                                                                                               synthesis                                                                                                                                                                                                  synthesis
                                                     protein X output
           A                                                protein                                                                                                                                                       protein                                   sudden                                         sudden
                            of  activating           A protein             of  activating        A protein
 fast gene A   R  slow gene       rate      input             R protein                           rate      input         R protein
activation           repression

                GENE X
                                                      time                                               time
(A)                                     (B)                                                            (C)
                 X

the gene activation (Figure 8–87C). Other properties of this network, such as the     Figure 8–87 How an incoherent feed-
dependence of the amplitude of the pulse on the various rate constants in the sys-    forward motif can generate a brief
tem, can be explored with the same computational tools. Thus, our intuitive guess    pulse of gene activation in response                                                                                                 to a sustained input. (A) Diagram of an
about how this system would behave was only partially correct; even the simplest     incoherent feed-forward motif in which the
of networks depends on precise interaction strengths, demonstrating yet again      transcription activator A and the repressor
why mathematics is needed to complement cartoon drawings.                   R control the expression of gene X using
                                                                                                    the AND NOT logic of Figure 8–85A. (B)
                                                                        When KA << KR, this motif generates a
A Coherent Feed-forward Interaction Detects Persistent Inputs           pulse of protein X expression, such that the
                                                                                                 output goes back down even if the input
In the bacterium E. coli, the sugar arabinose is only consumed when the pre-     remains high. (C) When KA >> KR, the
ferred sugar, glucose, is scarce. The strategy that cells use to assess the presence    same motif responds to a sustained input
of arabinose and absence of glucose involves a feed-forward arrangement that    by generating a sustained output.
is different from the one just described. In this case, depletion of glucose causes
an increase of cAMP, which is sensed by the CAP transcription activator protein,
as described previously. In this case, however, CAP also induces the synthesis of
a second transcription activator, AraC. Both activator proteins are necessary to
activate arabinose metabolic genes (the AND logic function in Figure 8–85B).
   This arrangement, known as a coherent feed-forward motif, has the interest-
ing characteristics illustrated in Figure 8–88. Imagine that two activators, A1 and     Figure 8–88 How a coherent feed-
A2, are both required to initiate transcription of a gene. The input to the network    forward motif responds to various
activates A1 directly, but only activates A2 through this A1 activation. Thus, for     inputs. (A) Diagram of a coherent feed-
                                                                                                 forward motif in which the transcription
a protein to be synthesized from this gene, long-term inputs are required that                                                                                                            activators A1 and A2 together activate
allow both A1 and A2 to be produced in active form. Brief input pulses are either     expression of gene X using the AND logic
ignored or produce small outputs. The requirement for a long input is important if      of Figure 8–85B. (B) The response to a
assurances about a signal are needed before a costly cellular program is triggered.      brief input can be either weak (as shown) or
                                                                                                       nonexistent. This allows the motif to ignoreFor example, glucose is the sugar on which E. coli cells grow best. Before cells trig-
                                                                                 random fluctuations in the concentration of
ger arabinose metabolism in the example above, it might be beneficial to be sure     signaling molecules. (C) A prolonged input
that glucose has been depleted (a sustained CAP pulse), rather than inducing the    produces a strong response that can turn
arabinose program during a transient glucose fluctuation.                                         off rapidly.


     SUDDEN
    ACTIVATING
       INPUT

    A1    A1                            pulsed input                                  prolonged input
    inactive
                                                                            A1 protein

                                         A1 protein
            A1                                                          A2 protein
                                          A2 protein

   fast A1 A1  A2 delayed A2                             protein X
  binding          binding                              output                               protein X
                                                                                         output
                GENE X
                                                     time                                   time
(A)                                           (B)                                              (C)
                 X

=== Original PDF page 596 ===
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION                                                  557

The Same Network Can Behave Differently in Different Cells
Because of Stochastic Effects

Up to this point, we have assumed that all cells in a population produce identical
behaviors if they contain the same network. It is important, however, to account
for the fact that cells often show considerable individuality in their responses.
Consider a situation in which a single mother cell divides into two daughter cells
of equal volume. If the mother cell has only one molecule of a given protein, then
only one daughter will inherit it. The daughters, though genetically identical,
are already different. This variability is most pronounced for molecules that are
present in small numbers. Nevertheless, even when there are many copies of a
particular protein (or RNA), it is very unlikely that both daughter cells will end up
with exactly the same number of molecules.
   This is just one illustration of a universal feature of cells: their behaviors are     Figure 8–89 Different levels of gene
                                                                                         expression in individual cells within a
often stochastic, meaning that they display variability in their protein content                                                                                           population of E. coli bacteria. For this
and therefore exhibit variations in phenotypes. In addition to the asymmet-     experiment, two different reporter proteins
ric partitioning of molecules after cell division, variability can originate from     (one fluorescing green, the other red),
many chemical reactions. Imagine, for example, that our mother cell contains a     controlled by a copy of the same promoter,
simple gene regulatory circuit with a positive feedback loop like that shown in    have been introduced into all of the
                                                                                                             bacteria. Some cells express only one gene
Figure 8–82B. Even if both daughter cells receive a copy of this circuit, including     copy, and so appear either red or green,
one copy of the initial transcription activator protein, there will be variability in     while others express both gene copies,
the time required for promoter binding—and it will be statistically nearly impos-    and so appear yellow. This experiment
sible for the genes in the two daughter cells to become activated at precisely     reveals variable levels of fluorescence,
                                                                                                              indicating variable levels of gene expressionthe same time. If the system is bistable and poised near a switching point, then                                                                                                             within an apparently uniform population of
variability in the response might flip the switch in only one daughter cell. Two      cells. (From M.B. Elowitz et al., Science
daughter cells that were born identical can thereby acquire, by chance, a dramatic    297:1183–1186, 2002. With permission
difference in phenotype.                                                                  from AAAS.)
   More generally, isogenic populations of cells grown in the same environment
display diversity in size, shape, cell-cycle position, and gene expression. These
differences arise because biochemical reactions require probabilistic collisions
between randomly moving molecules, with each event resulting in changes in the
number of molecular species by integer amounts. The amplified effect of fluctua-
tions in a molecular reactant, or the compounded effects of fluctuations across
many molecular reactants, often accumulates as an observable phenotype. This
can endow a cell with individuality and generate nongenetic cell-to-cell variabil-
ity in a population.
   Nongenetic variability can be studied in the laboratory by single-cell mea-
surements of fluorescent proteins expressed from genes under the control of a
specific promoter. Live cells can be mounted on a slide and viewed through a
fluorescence microscope, revealing the striking variability in protein expression
levels (Figure 8–89). Another approach is to use flow cytometry, which works by
streaming a dilute suspension of cells past an illuminator and measuring the fluo-
rescence of individual cells as they flow past the detector. Fluorescence values
can be used to build histograms that reveal the variability in a process across a
population of cells, with a broad histogram indicating higher variability.

Several Computational Approaches Can Be Used to Model
the Reactions in Cells

We have focused primarily on the use of ordinary differential equations to model
the dynamics of simple regulatory circuits. These models are called deterministic,
because they do not incorporate stochastic variability and will always produce
the same result from a specific set of parameters. As we have seen, such models
can provide useful insights, particularly in the detailed mechanistic analysis of
small regulatory circuits. However, other types of computational approaches are
also needed to comprehend the great complexity of cell behavior. Stochastic mod-
els, for example, attempt to account for the very important problem of random
variability in molecular networks. These models do not provide deterministic
predictions about the behavior of molecules; instead, they incorporate random

=== Original PDF page 597 ===
558    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


variation into molecule numbers and interactions, and the purpose of these mod-
els is to obtain a better understanding of the probability that a system will exist in
a certain state over time.
   Numerous other modeling strategies have been or are being developed. Bool-
ean networks are used for the qualitative analysis of complex gene regulatory
networks containing large numbers of interacting components. In these models,
each molecule is a node that can exist in either the active or inactive state, thereby
affecting the state of the nodes it is linked to. Models of this sort provide insights
into the flow of information through a network, and they were useful in helping
us understand the complex gene regulatory network that controls the early devel-
opment of the sea urchin (see Figure 7–45). Boolean networks therefore reduce
complex networks to a highly simplified (and potentially inaccurate) form. At the
other extreme are agent-based simulations, in which thousands of molecules (or
“agents”) in a system are modeled individually, and their probable behaviors and
interactions with each other over time are calculated on the basis of predicted
physical and chemical behaviors, often while taking stochastic variation into
account. Agent-based approaches are computationally demanding but have the
potential to generate highly life-like simulations of real biological systems.

Statistical Methods Are Critical for the Analysis of Biological Data

Dynamics, differential equations, and theoretical modeling are not the be-all and
end-all of mathematics. Other branches of the subject are no less important for
biologists. Statistics—the mathematics of probabilistic processes and noisy data
sets—is an inescapable part of every biologist’s life.
   This is true in two main ways. First, imperfect measurement devices and other
errors generate experimental noise in our data. Second, all cell-biological pro-
cesses depend on the stochastic behavior of individual molecules, as we just
discussed, and this results in biological noise in our results. How, in the face of all
this noise, do we come to conclusions about the truth of hypotheses? The answer
is statistical analysis, which shows how to move from one level of description to
another: from a set of erratic individual data points to a simpler description of the
key features of the data.
    Statistics teaches us that the more times we repeat our measurements, the
better and more refined the conclusions we can draw from them. Given many
repetitions, it becomes possible to describe our data in terms of variables that
summarize the features that matter: the mean value of the measured variable,
taken over the set of data points; the magnitude of the noise (the standard devi-
ation of the set of data points); the likely error in our estimate of the mean value
(the standard error of the mean); and, for specialists, the details of the probability
distribution describing the likelihood that an individual measurement will yield
a given value. For all these things, statistics provides recipes and quantitative for-
mulas that biologists must understand if they are to make rigorous conclusions
on the basis of variable results.

Summary

Quantitative mathematical analysis can provide a powerful extra dimension in our
understanding of cell regulation and function. Cell regulatory systems often depend
on macromolecular interactions, and mathematical analysis of the dynamics of
these interactions can unveil important insights into the importance of binding
affinities and protein stability in the generation of transcriptional or other signals.
Regulatory systems often employ network motifs that generate useful behaviors:
a rapid negative feedback loop dampens the response to input signals; a delayed
negative feedback loop creates a biochemical oscillator; positive feedback yields a
system that alternates between two stable states; and feed-forward motifs provide
systems that generate transient signal pulses or respond only to sustained inputs.
The dynamic behavior of these network motifs can be dissected in detail with deter-
ministic and stochastic mathematical modeling.

=== Original PDF page 598 ===
PROBLEMS                                                                               559

PROBLEMS

Which statements are true? Explain why or why not.                                                           protein sediment more slowly than the smaller one? Can
                                                  you think of an analogy from everyday experience that8–1    Because a monoclonal antibody recognizes a spe-
                                                     might help you with this problem?cific antigenic site (epitope), it binds only to the specific
protein against which it was made.                                                 8–9    Hybridoma technology allows one to generate
                                                   monoclonal antibodies to virtually any protein. Why is8–2    Given the inexorable march of technology,  it
                                                                                                it, then, that genetically tagging proteins with epitopes isseems inevitable that the sensitivity of detection of mol-
                                                    such a commonly used technique, especially as an epitopeecules will ultimately be pushed beyond the yoctomole
                                                             tag has the potential to interfere with the function of thelevel (10–24 mole).
                                                            protein?
8–3      If each cycle of PCR doubles the amount of DNA
                                                 8–10  How many copies of a protein need to be pres-synthesized in the previous cycle, then 10 cycles will give a
                                                          ent in a cell in order for it to be visible as a band on an103-fold amplification, 20 cycles will give a 106-fold ampli-
                                             SDS gel? Assume that you can load 100 μg of cell extractfication, and 30 cycles will give a 109-fold amplification.
                                                      onto a gel and that you can detect 10 ng in a single band
8–4    To judge the biological importance of an interac-    by silver staining the gel. The concentration of protein
tion between protein A and protein B, we need to know    in cells is about 200 mg/mL, and a typical mammalian
quantitative details about their concentrations, affinities,     cell has a volume of about 1000 μm3 and a typical bacte-
and kinetic behaviors.                                 rium a volume of about 1 μm3. Given these parameters,
                                                              calculate the number of copies of a 120-kilodalton pro-
8–5    The rate of change in the concentration of any    tein that would need to be present in a mammalian cell
molecular species X is given by the balance between its   and in a bacterium in order to give a detectable band
rate of appearance and its rate of disappearance.          on a gel.
8–6     After a sudden increase in its rate of synthesis, a   8–11   You have isolated the proteins from two adjacent
protein with a slow rate of degradation will reach a new    spots  after two-dimensional  polyacrylamide-gel  elec-
steady-state level more quickly than a protein with a rapid    trophoresis and digested them with trypsin. When the
rate of degradation.                                   masses of the peptides were measured by MALDI-TOF
                                                mass spectrometry, the peptides from the two proteins
Discuss the following problems.                       were found to be identical except for one (Figure Q8–2).
                                                       For this peptide, the mass-to-charge (m/z) values differed
8–7   A common step in the isolation of cells from a                                                    by 80, a value that does not correspond to a difference in
sample of animal tissue is to treat the tissue with trypsin,                                                amino acid sequence. (For example, glutamic acid instead
collagenase, and EDTA. Why is such a treatment neces-                                                                of valine at one position would give an m/z difference of
sary, and what does each component accomplish? And                                                   around 30.) Can you suggest a possible difference between
why does this treatment not kill the cells?                                                          the two peptides that might account for the observed
8–8    Tropomyosin,  at 93 kilodaltons, sediments  at   m/z difference?
2.6S, whereas the 65-kilodalton protein, hemoglobin, sedi-
ments at 4.3S. (The sedimentation coefficient S is a linear
measure of the rate of sedimentation.) These two proteins
are drawn to scale in Figure Q8–1. Why does the bigger

                                                                                                  3706
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        abundance


                                                                                                   3786
            hemoglobin                  tropomyosin                                                                                                                   abundance

                                                                                          m/z (mass-to-charge ratio)


                                                                     Figure Q8–2 Masses of peptides measured by MALDI-TOF mass
Figure Q8–1 Scale models of tropomyosin                               spectrometry (Problem 8–11). Only the numbered peaks differ between
and hemoglobin (Problem 8–8).                                           the two protein samples.

=== Original PDF page 599 ===
560    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


8–12   You want to amplify the DNA between the two   8–17   Examine the network motifs in Figure Q8–5.
stretches of sequence shown in Figure Q8–3. Of the listed    Decide which ones are negative feedback loops and which
primers, choose the pair that will allow you to amplify the    are positive. Explain your reasoning.
DNA by PCR.
                                                                                      (A) ACTIVATING                (B) ACTIVATING
                   DNA to be ampliﬁed                                    INPUT                     INPUT

   5′-GACCTGTGGAAGC                 CATACGGGATTGA-3′
      3′ -CTGGACACCTTCG                 GTATGCCCTAACT-5′                    GENE X                  GENE X

                                                                       X                     X
                                primers
  (1) 5′-GACCTGTGGAAGC-3′                (5) 5′-CATACGGGATTGA-3′                                                                             GENE Y                  GENE Y
  (2) 5′-CTGGACACCTTCG-3′                (6) 5′-GTATGCCCTAACT-3′
  (3) 5′-CGAAGGTGTCCAG-3′                (7) 5′-TGTTAGGGCATAC-3′
  (4) 5′-GCTTCCACAGGTC-3′                (8) 5′-TCAATCCCGTATG-3′                        Y                     Y

Figure Q8–3 DNA to be amplified and potential PCR primers
(Problem 8–12).                                                                      GENE Z                  GENE Z

8–13   In the very first round of PCR using genomic                                 Z                         Z
DNA, the DNA primers prime synthesis that terminates
only when the cycle ends (or when a random end of DNA
is encountered). Yet, by the end of 20–30 cycles—a typical
amplification—the only visible product is defined pre-           (C) ACTIVATING               (D) ACTIVATING
                                                                             INPUT                     INPUT
cisely by the ends of the DNA primers. In what cycle is a
double-strand fragment of the correct size first generated?
                                                                         GENE X                  GENE X
8–14   Explain the difference between a gain-of-function
mutation and a dominant-negative mutation. Why are                  X                     X
both these types of mutation usually dominant?

8–15   Discuss the following statement: “We would have                      GENE Y                  GENE Y
no idea today of the importance of insulin as a regulatory
hormone if its absence were not associated with the human                      Y                     Y
disease diabetes. It is the dramatic consequences of its
absence that focused early efforts on the identification of
insulin and the study of its normal role in physiology.”                               GENE Z                  GENE Z

8–16   You have received the results from an RNA-seq                                 Z                          Z
analysis of mRNAs from liver. You had anticipated count-
ing the number of reads of each mRNA to determine
the relative abundance of different mRNAs. But you are     Figure Q8–5 Network motifs composed of transcription activators and
puzzled because many of the mRNAs have given you     repressors (Problem 8–17).
results like those shown in Figure Q8–4. How is it that dif-
ferent parts of an mRNA can be represented at different   8–18   Imagine that a random perturbation positions
levels?                                               a bistable system precisely at the boundary between two
                                                               stable states (at the orange dot in Figure Q8–6). How would
                                                          the system respond?
                                                                                                             Figure Q8–6
                                                                                                                            Perturbations of a bistable
        reads                                                                                               system (Problem 8–18).
                                                                                                 As shown by the green
                                Y           1                                     lines, after perturbation 1
                                                                of               2                         the system returns to its
     mRNA                                                                                                                                 original stable state (green
                                                                                                                  dot at left), and after
                                                                              3                                   perturbation 2, the system        exons       1       2     3     4        5
                                                                                               moves to the other stableFigure Q8–4 RNA-seq reads for a liver mRNA (Problem 8–16). The                                                     concentration                                              state (green dot at right).
exon structure of the mRNA is indicated, with protein-coding segments                                                     Perturbation 3 moves
indicated in light blue and untranslated regions in dark blue. The                                                          the system to the precise
numbers of sequencing reads are indicated by the heights of the                                                   boundary between the two
vertical lines above the mRNA.                                                           concentration of X               stable states (orange dot).

=== Original PDF page 600 ===
REFERENCES                                                                             561


8–19   Detailed analysis of the regulatory region of the   To probe the functions of these three sites, you make a
Lac operon has revealed surprising complexity. Instead    series of constructs in which various combinations of oper-
of a single binding site for the Lac repressor, as might be    ator sites are present. You examine their ability to repress
expected, there are three sites termed operators (O1, O2,    expression of β-galactosidase, using either tetrameric
and O3) arrayed along the DNA as shown in Figure Q8–7.    (wild type) or dimeric (mutant) forms of the Lac repres-
                                                                       sor. The dimeric form of the repressor can bind to a single
                                                          operator (with the same affinity as the tetramer) with each           92 bp              401 bp                 2-mer  4-mer
                                           monomer binding to half the site. The tetramer, the form
1       O3     O1                          O2     110   6700    normally expressed in cells, can bind to two sites simulta-
                                                           neously. When you measure repression of β-galactosidase
2       O3     O1                                    90   3900     expression, you find the results shown in Figure Q8–7, with
                                                         higher numbers indicating more effective repression.
3              O1                          O2      80   1400    A.     Which single operator site is the most important
                                                                  for repression? How can you tell?
4              O1                                    60    140    B.    Do combinations of operator sites (Figure Q8–7,
                                                           constructs 1, 2, 3, and 5) substantially increase repression
5       O3                                 O2       1      5
                                                    by the dimeric repressor? Do combinations of operator
                                                                      sites substantially increase repression by the tetrameric
6       O3                                            1      2
                                                            repressor? If the two repressors behave differently, offer an
                                                         explanation for the difference.7                                         O2       1      1
                                                     C.     The wild-type repressor binds O3 very weakly
8                                                     1      1    when it is by itself on a segment of DNA. However, if O1
                                                                             is included on the same segment of DNA, the repressor
Figure Q8–7 Repression of β-galactosidase by promoter regions that     binds O3 quite well. How can that be?
contain different combinations of Lac repressor binding sites (Problem
8–19). The base-pair (bp) separation of the three operator sites is
shown. Numbers at right refer to the level of repression, with higher
numbers indicating more effective repression by dimeric (2-mer) or
tetrameric (4-mer) repressors. (From S. Oehler et al., EMBO J. 9:973–
979, 1990. With permission from John Wiley & Sons.)

REFERENCES
Isolating Cells and Growing Them in Culture                Baxevanis AD, Bader GD & Wishart DS (eds.) (2020) Bioinformatics:
                                                       A Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins, 4th ed.Greenfield E (2014) Antibodies: A Laboratory Manual, 2nd ed. Cold
                                                                  Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.    Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
                                                                  Goodrich JA & Kugel JF (2007) Binding and Kinetics for MolecularSherr CJ & DePinho RA (2000) Cellular senescence: mitotic clock or
                                                                                      Biologists. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory     culture shock? Cell 102, 407–410.
                                                                              Press.
Spector DL, Goldman RD & Leinwand LA (eds.) (1998) Cells: A
                                                    Mehmood S, Allison TM & Robinson CV (2015) Mass spectrometry    Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor
                                                                                     of protein complexes: from origins to applications. Annu. Rev.    Laboratory Press.
                                                                         Phys. Chem. 66, 453–474.
Todaro GJ & Green H (1963) Quantitative studies of the growth of mouse
                                                                      O’Connell MR, Gamsjaeger R & Mackay JP (2009) The structural   embryo cells in culture and their development into established lines.
                                                                                   analysis of protein-protein interactions by NMR spectroscopy.     J. Cell Biol. 17, 299–313.
                                                                       Proteomics 9, 5224–5232.
                                                                               Pollard TD (2010) A guide to simple and informative binding assays.Purifying Proteins                                                                          Mol. Biol. Cell 21, 4061–4067.
Burgess R & Deutcher MP (eds.) (2009) Guide to Protein Purification,       Wuthrich K (2003) NMR studies of structure and function of
   2nd ed. Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 463. Cambridge, MA:                   biological macromolecules (Nobel Lecture). J. Biomol. NMR
   Academic Press.                                                        27, 13–39.
De Duve C & Beaufay H (1981) A short history of tissue fractionation.
     J. Cell Biol. 91, 293s–299s.                               Analyzing and Manipulating DNA
Scopes RK (1994) Protein Purification: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed.      Gibson DG, Young L, Chuang RY . . . Smith HO (2009) Enzymatic
   New York: Springer-Verlag.                                          assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases.
Simpson RJ, Adams PD & Golemis EA (2008) Basic Methods in Protein         Nat. Methods 6, 343–345.
     Purification and Analysis: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor,    Green MR & Sambrook J (2012) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
    NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.                               Manual, 4th ed. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor
Wood DW (2014) New trends and affinity tag designs for recombinant           Laboratory Press.
    protein purification. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 26, 54–61.                 Kosuri S & Church GM (2014) Large-scale de novo DNA
                                                                               synthesis: technologies and applications. Nat. Methods 11,
Analyzing Proteins                                              499–507.
Aebersold R & Mann M (2016) Mass-spectrometric exploration of          Metzker ML (2010) Sequencing technologies—the next generation.
   proteome structure and function. Nature 537, 347–355.                     Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 31–46.

=== Original PDF page 601 ===
562    Chapter 8:  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems


Mullis K, Faloona F, Scharf S . . . Erlich H (1986) Specific enzymatic          Mali P, Esvelt KM & Church GM (2013) Cas9 as a versatile tool for
    amplification of DNA in vitro: the polymerase chain reaction. Cold           engineering biology. Nat. Methods 10, 957–963.
    Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 51 Pt 1, 263–273.                    Rio DC, Ares M, Hannon GJ & Wilson TW (2011) RNA: A Laboratory
Mullis KB (1990) The unusual origin of the polymerase chain reaction.           Manual. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
    Sci. Am. 262, 56–61, 64–55.                                               Press.
Nathans D & Smith HO (1975) Restriction endonucleases in the             Stark R, Grzelak M & Hadfield J (2019) RNA sequencing: the teenage
    analysis and restructuring of DNA molecules. Annu. Rev. Biochem.          years. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 631–656.
    44, 273–293.                                                     Strachan T & Read AP (2018) Human Molecular Genetics, 5th ed.
Sanger F, Nicklen S & Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing with chain-        Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
    terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463–5467.       Wilson RC & Doudna JA (2013) Molecular mechanisms of RNA
Shendure J & Lieberman Aiden E (2012) The expanding scope of DNA             interference. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 42, 217–239.
    sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 1084–1094.
Watson JD, Myers RM & Caudy AA (2007) Recombinant DNA: Genes     Mathematical Analysis of Cell Function
   and Genomes—A Short Course, 3rd ed. Cold Spring Harbor, NY:       Alon U (2007) Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches.
   Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.                                     Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 450–461.
                                                                     Alon U (2019) An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of
Studying Gene Function and Expression                            Biological Circuits, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Agrotis A & Ketteler R (2015) A new age in functional genomics                Ferrell JE, Jr. & Ha SH (2014) Ultrasensitivity part III: cascades, bistable
    using CRISPR/Cas9 in arrayed library screening. Front. Genet. 6,            switches, and oscillators. Trends Biochem. Sci. 39, 612–618.
    300.                                                     Gunawardena J (2014) Models in biology: “accurate descriptions of
D’Haeseleer P (2005) How does gene expression clustering work?             our pathetic thinking.” BMC Biol. 12, 29.
    Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1499–1501.                                             Ingalis BP (2013) Mathematical Modeling in Systems Biology: An
Doudna JA (2020) The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome            Introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
    editing. Nature 578, 229–236.                                     Lewis J (2008) From signals to patterns: space, time, and mathematics
Fellmann C & Lowe SW (2014) Stable RNA interference rules for                    in developmental biology. Science 322, 399–403.
    silencing. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 10–18.                              Novak B & Tyson JJ (2008) Design principles of biochemical oscillators.
Ingolia NT, Hussmann JA & Weissman JS (2019) Ribosome profiling:            Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 981–991.
    global views of translation. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 11.         Xia PF, Ling H, Foo JL & Chang MW (2019) Synthetic genetic circuits
Luecken MD & Theis FJ (2019) Current best practices in single-cell                for programmable biological functionalities. Biotechnol. Adv. 37,
   RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8746.                  107393.