=== Original PDF page 1352 ===
                                                                                        1313



                                             C H A P T E R

Pathogens and Infection           23





Infectious diseases currently cause about one-quarter of all human deaths world-
wide, more than all forms of cancer combined and second only to cardiovascular                                                                 IN THIS CHAPTER
diseases. There is a continuing heavy burden of ancient diseases such as tuber-
culosis and malaria, and these are increasingly difficult to treat because of rising    Introduction to Pathogens
drug resistance. Newer infectious diseases continually emerge, including the cur-
rent pandemic (worldwide epidemic) of COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019),    Cell Biology of Pathogen
which was first clinically observed in 2019 and has since infected hundreds of mil-                                                                                     Infection
lions of people and caused millions of deaths worldwide. Moreover, some diseases
long thought to result from other causes are now recognized to be associated with                                                                The Human Microbiota
infections. Most gastric ulcers, for example, are caused not by stress or spicy food,
but by infection of the stomach lining by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori.
   The burden of infectious diseases is not spread equally across the planet.
Poorer countries and communities suffer disproportionately, often due to poor
public sanitation and overburdened health systems, as occurred in Haiti in 2010
with a severe cholera outbreak after a devastating earthquake. Some infectious
diseases, however, occur primarily or exclusively in industrialized communities:
Legionnaires’ disease, for example, a bacterial infection of the lungs, commonly
spreads through air-conditioning systems.
   Since the mid-1800s, physicians and scientists have struggled to identify the
microbes—collectively called pathogens—that are capable of causing infectious
diseases. More recently, the advent of microbial genetics and molecular cell biology
has greatly enhanced our understanding of the causes and mechanisms of infec-
tious diseases. We now know that pathogens frequently exploit the attributes of
their host’s cells in order to infect them. This understanding can give us new insights
into normal cell biology, as well as strategies for treating and preventing infections.
   Although pathogens are understandably a focus of attention, only a relatively
small fraction of the microbial species we encounter are pathogens. Much of the
biomass of Earth is made up of microbes. They produce everything from the oxygen
we breathe to the soil nutrients we use to grow food and represent the bottom of the
ecological pyramid. Even those species of microbes that colonize the human body
do not generally cause disease. Many of these microbes have a beneficial effect on
the health of the organism, assisting its normal development and physiology.
   In this chapter, we give an overview of the different kinds of pathogens. We
then discuss the cell biology of infection—the molecular interactions between
pathogens and their hosts. Finally, we discuss an emerging concept that the many
microbes that normally colonize our body, the so-called human microbiota, may
actually benefit our health. In Chapter 24, we consider how our innate and adap-
tive immune systems collaborate to defend us against pathogens while leaving
our microbiota intact.

INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS
We normally think of pathogens as hostile invaders, but a pathogen, like any other
organism, is simply exploiting an available niche in which to live and procreate.
Living on or in a host organism is a very effective strategy, and it is possible that

=== Original PDF page 1353 ===
1314   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


                                                                                             Figure 23–1 Parasitism at many levels.
                                                                                                                         (A) Most animals harbor parasites, an
                                                                                       example being the blacklegged tick, or
                                                                                             deer tick (Ixodes scapularis), shown here
                                                                                  on a human finger. Although ticks of this
                                                                                                species thrive on white-tailed deer and
                                                                                                     other wild mammals, they can also live
                                                                                  on humans. (B) Ticks themselves harbor
                                                                                                                         their own parasites including the bacterium
                                                                                                              Borrelia burgdorferi, stained here with a
                                                                                                                                         vital dye that labels living bacteria green
                                                                                   and dead bacteria red. These long spiral-
                                                                                    shaped bacteria live in deer ticks and
                                                                                      can be transmitted to humans during a
                                                                                                                              tick’s blood meal. B. burgdorferi causes
                (A)                                (B)
                                                                  20 µm                  Lyme disease, which is characterized by
                                                                                       a bull’s-eye–shaped skin rash and fever;
                                                                                                                                                                                                           if the infection is left untreated, various
every organism on Earth is subject to some type of infection (Figure 23–1). Even     complications can result, including arthritis
bacteria can be infected by viruses called bacteriophages (see Figure 1–37). It is    and neurological abnormalities. The idea
not surprising then that many microorganisms have evolved the ability to survive     that parasites have their own parasites was
and reproduce in the human body, a nutrient-rich, warm, and moist environment     noted by Jonathan Swift in 1733:
                                                                                                  “So, naturalists observe, a fleathat remains at a uniform temperature and constantly renews itself. In this sec-                                                                               Has smaller fleas that on him prey;
tion, we discuss some of the common features that microorganisms must have    And these have smaller still to bite ’em;
in order to colonize the human body or cause disease, and we explore the wide    And so proceed ad infinitum.” (A, National
variety of organisms that are known to cause disease.                                  Geographic Image Collection/Alamy Stock
                                                                                               Photo; B, courtesy of M. Embers.)
Pathogens Can Be Viruses, Bacteria, or Eukaryotes

Many types of microbes cause disease in humans, and others reside on or in our
bodies without causing harm. The most familiar are viruses and bacteria. Viruses
cause diseases ranging from COVID-19 and Ebola virus disease to the common
cold. Viruses are essentially fragments of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) that generally
encode a relatively small number of gene products and are wrapped in a protec-
tive shell of proteins (Figure 23–2A) and (in some cases) an outer membrane
envelope. Much larger and more complex than viruses, bacteria are prokaryotic
cells that perform most of their basic metabolic functions themselves, relying on
the host primarily for nutrition (Figure 23–2B). Bacteria cause illnesses ranging
from tuberculosis, which causes roughly 1.4 million deaths per year, to pneumo-
nia, as well as diarrheal and sexually transmitted diseases.
  Some other infectious agents are eukaryotic organisms. These range from
single-celled protozoa (Figure 23–2C) and fungi (Figure 23–2D) to large, complex
metazoa such as parasitic worms. One of the most common human parasites,
shared by about a billion people at present, is the nematode worm Ascaris lumbri-
coides, which infects the gut (Figure 23–2E). It resembles its harmless nematode
cousin Caenorhabditis elegans, which is used as a model organism for genetic and
developmental biological research (see Figure 1–42). C. elegans, however, is only
about 1 mm in length, whereas Ascaris can reach 30 cm.

Pathogens Interact with Their Hosts in Different Ways

Although the ability of a particular microorganism to cause disease depends
on many factors, it requires that the pathogen possess specialized pathogenic
characteristics that allow it to live in humans. One way we distinguish between
pathogens is by classifying them as primary versus opportunistic on the basis of
the circumstances under which they cause human disease. Primary pathogens
can cause overt disease in most healthy, nonimmune people. Opportunistic
pathogens do not cause disease in healthy people but can cause illness in
individuals suffering from other conditions. Some primary pathogens cause
acute, life-threatening epidemic infections and spread rapidly from one sick or
dying host to another; historically important examples include the bacterium
Vibrio cholerae, which causes cholera, and the sudden acute respiratory syn-
drome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza viruses, which cause COVID-19

=== Original PDF page 1354 ===
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                                                             1315





                                                           (C)
                                                                              15 µm




(A)
                                  10 nm





(B)                                                          (E)                                                     (D)
                                   1 µm                                       5 cm                               50 µm


and flu, respectively. Others may persistently infect a single individual for years     Figure 23–2 Pathogens in many forms.
without causing overt disease; examples include the bacterium Mycobacterium      (A) The structure of the protein coat, or
                                                                                                     capsid, of poliovirus. This virus was oncetuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis, and the intestinal worm Ascaris (see                                                                                       a common cause of paralysis, but the
Figure 23–2E). Although these potential primary pathogens can make some     disease (poliomyelitis) has been greatly
people critically ill, billions of people carry these foreign organisms in an asymp-    reduced by widespread vaccination.
tomatic way, often unaware that they are infected.                                                 (B) The bacterium Vibrio cholerae, the
   In order to survive and multiply, a successful pathogen must be able to     causative agent of the epidemic diarrheal
                                                                                                disease cholera, shown here with its(1) enter the host (usually by breaking an epithelial barrier); (2) find a nutritionally                                                                                               attached flagellum. (C) The protozoan
compatible niche in the host’s body; (3) avoid, subvert, or circumvent the host’s     parasite Trypanosoma brucei (purple)
innate and adaptive immune responses; (4) replicate, using host resources; and      in a field of erythrocytes (red blood cells;
(5) exit one host and spread to another. Pathogens have evolved various mecha­      pink). This parasite causes African
nisms that exploit the biology of their host organisms to help accomplish these     sleeping sickness, a potentially fatal
                                                                                                disease of the central nervous system.
five tasks. For some pathogens, these mechanisms are adapted to a unique host                                                                                                                    (D) Powdery mildew spores germinating
species, whereas for others the mechanisms are sufficiently general to permit inva-    on an Arabidopsis leaf. (E) This clump of
sion, survival, and replication in a wide variety of hosts. Because pathogens have     Ascaris nematodes was passed rectally
evolved the ability to interface directly with the molecular machinery of host cells,    by a child in Africa. (A, courtesy of Robert
we have learned a great deal about cell biological principles by studying them.         Grant, Stephan Crainic, and James M.
                                                                                                 Hogle; B, photograph kindly provided by
   Our constant exposure to pathogens has strongly influenced human evolu-                                                                                     John Mekalanos; C, CDC, Department of
tion. In modern times, humans have learned how to limit the ability of pathogens     Health and Human Services; D, courtesy
to infect us through improvements in public health measures and childhood      of Kim Findlay and John Innes Centre;
nutrition, vaccines, antimicrobial drugs, and routine testing of blood used for     E, CDC/James Gathany.)
transfusions. As we learn more about the mechanisms by which pathogens cause
disease (called pathogenesis), we will devise new ways to supplement or augment
our immune systems in fighting infections.
  We now introduce the basic features of each of the three major types of
pathogens—bacteria, eukaryotic parasites, and viruses—before we examine the
detailed mechanisms used by these pathogens to infect their hosts.

Bacteria Are Diverse and Occupy a Remarkable Variety
of Ecological Niches
Bacteria are small but highly sophisticated cells whose organization and behav-
iors have attracted the attention of many scientists for well over a century. Bacteria
are classified broadly on the basis of their cellular and molecular features. One

=== Original PDF page 1355 ===
1316   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection





    Spirillum                 Spirochete        Coccus   Coccobacillus     Vibrio          Bacillus
 (A)



                                         teichoic acid
                                                               lipopolysaccharide (LPS) outer
                                                            leaﬂet of outer membrane
                                                       pore protein
                                     peptidoglycan
                                         layer (cell wall)

                                              outer                                                                                                   pilus
                                 membrane
                                                                                                      long
                                                                                                                             helical
                                        periplasm                                                  ﬂagellum                                                                peptidoglycan
                                                                                                                        outer
                                           inner                                                          membrane
                               membrane

                               membrane
                                           proteins
  CYTOSOL                                                                           CYTOSOL                                                                                                                             inner
                                                                                               membrane
      GRAM POSITIVE                           GRAM NEGATIVE
(B)                                                               (C)                                               (D)

Figure 23–3 Bacterial shapes and cell-surface structures. (A) Bacteria are traditionally classified by shape. For example, the bacterium Borrelia
burgdorferi, shown in Figure 23–1B, is spiral shaped and is thus classified as a spirochete. (B and C) Bacteria are also classified as Gram positive or
Gram negative on the basis of a staining procedure first described in 1884. (B) Gram-positive bacteria such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus
have a single membrane and a thick cell wall made of cross-linked peptidoglycan. They are called Gram positive because they retain the violet dye
used in the Gram-staining procedure. (C) Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Salmonella enterica have two membranes,
separated by the periplasm (see Figure 11–17). The peptidoglycan cell wall of these organisms is located in the periplasm and is thinner than
in Gram-positive bacteria; they therefore fail to retain the dye in the Gram-staining procedure. The inner membrane of both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria is a phospholipid bilayer. The inner leaflet of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is also made primarily of
phospholipids, whereas the outer leaflet of the outer membrane is composed of the unique glycosylated lipid LPS. (D) Cell-surface appendages
are important for bacterial behavior. Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria swim using the rotation of helical flagella. An example is V.
cholerae, depicted in panel A and shown in Figure 23–2B. Although the bacterium illustrated has only a single flagellum at one pole, many have
multiple flagella. Pili (also called fimbriae) are used to adhere to various surfaces in the host and to facilitate genetic exchange between bacteria.
Some kinds of pili can retract to generate force and thereby help bacteria move along surfaces.



such feature is their shape—rods, spheres (cocci), or spirals (Figure 23–3A).
They are also traditionally classified by their so-called Gram-staining prop-
erties, which is an older staining method that is still informative. This staining
reflects differences in the structure of the bacterial surface, a layer that is import-
ant for pathogens because it directly contacts host cells and the immune system.
Gram-positive bacteria have a thick layer of peptidoglycan cell wall outside their
inner (plasma) membrane (Figure 23–3B), whereas Gram-negative bacteria
have a thinner peptidoglycan cell wall. In both cases, the cell wall protects against
lysis by osmotic swelling, and it is a target of host antibacterial proteins such as
lysozyme and antibiotics such as penicillin. Gram-negative bacteria are also cov-
ered outside the cell wall by an outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) (Figure 23–3C). Both peptidoglycan and LPS are unique to bacteria and
are recognized as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by the host
innate immune system, as discussed in Chapter 24. The surface of bacterial cells
can also display an array of appendages, including flagella and pili, which enable
bacteria to swim or adhere to desirable surfaces, respectively (Figure 23–3D).
Apart from cell shape and structure, differences in ribosomal RNA and genomic
DNA sequence are also used for phylogenetic classification. Because bacterial
genomes are small—typically between 1,000,000 and 5,000,000 nucleotide pairs
(compared to more than 3,000,000,000 for humans)—they are now simple to
sequence, making this an important new classification tool.

=== Original PDF page 1356 ===
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                                                             1317


   Bacteria also exhibit extraordinary molecular, metabolic, and ecological
diversity. At the molecular level, bacteria are far more diverse than eukaryotes,
and they can occupy ecological niches having extremes of temperature, salt
concentrations, and nutrient limitation. To describe how flexible bacterial patho-
gens are with respect to their growth niche, we discriminate between facultative
pathogens and obligate pathogens. Facultative bacteria can replicate in an envi-
ronmental reservoir such as water or soil and only cause disease if they happen
to encounter a susceptible host. Obligate pathogens can only replicate inside
the body of their host. Bacteria also differ in the range of hosts they will infect.
A champion generalist is the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
which can cause disease in a wide variety of plants and animals. In contrast, Sal-
monella enterica serovar Typhi only infects humans, causing typhoid fever, an
ancient and life-threatening human disease that was sensationalized by the story
of the cook “Typhoid Mary,” who carried this bacterium asymptomatically and
spread typhoid fever in New York City in the early 1900s.

Bacterial Pathogens Carry Specialized Virulence Genes

Genes that contribute to the ability of an organism to cause disease (as opposed
to genes needed solely to grow and replicate) are called virulence genes, and the
proteins they encode are called virulence factors. In general, the presence of a
relatively small number of such virulence genes distinguishes pathogenic bacte-
ria from their closest nonpathogenic relatives. Virulence genes are often clustered
together on the bacterial chromosome; large clusters are called pathogenicity
islands. Virulence genes can also be carried on bacteriophages (bacterial viruses)
or transposons (see Table 5–4), both of which integrate into the bacterial chromo-
some, or on extrachromosomal virulence plasmids (Figure 23–4A).
   Pathogenic bacteria are thought to emerge when groups of virulence genes
are transferred together into a previously avirulent bacterium by a process called
horizontal gene transfer (to distinguish  it from vertical gene transfer from
parent to offspring). Horizontal transfer can occur by one of three mechanisms:
natural transformation by released naked DNA, transduction (infection) by bac-
teriophages, or sexual exchange by conjugation (Figure 23–4B and Movie 23.1).
Sequencing the genomes of pathogenic and nonpathogenic bacteria has revealed                                                                                             Figure 23–4 Genetic differences
that horizontal gene transfer has made important contributions to bacterial evo-    between pathogenic and nonpathogenic
lution, enabling species to inhabit new ecological and nutritional niches and to     bacteria. (A) Genetic differences between
cause disease. Even within a single bacterial species, the amount of chromosomal     nonpathogenic E. coli and two closely
                                                                                                            related food-borne pathogens—Shigella
                                                                                                                            flexneri, which causes dysentery, and
        E. coli                  Shigella ﬂexneri           Salmonella enterica                            Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium,
                                                                                       a common cause of food poisoning.
                                                                                         Nonpathogenic E. coli has a single circular
                                                                                   chromosome. The chromosome of S.
                                                                                                                         flexneri differs from that of E. coli in achromosome            virulence plasmid containing    pathogenicity islands
                               virulence genes          containing virulence                                 limited number of locations; most of the
(A)                                                     genes                               genes required for pathogenesis (virulence
                                                                                               genes) are carried on an extrachromosomal
                                                                                                           virulence plasmid. The chromosome of S.
                                    free DNA                                                              enterica serovar Typhimurium carries two
                                                                                                            large inserts (pathogenicity islands) not
                                                              TRANSFORMATION      found in the E. coli chromosome; these
                                                                                                                inserts each contain many virulence genes.
                                DNA-containing virus                                                        (B) Bacterial pathogens evolve by horizontal
                                     (bacteriophage)                                          gene transfer. This can occur by three
                                                                                       mechanisms: natural transformation, in
                                                                TRANSDUCTION       which naked DNA is taken in by competent
                                                                                                             bacteria; transduction, in which bacterial
                                                                                                          viruses (bacteriophages) transfer DNANONPATHOGENIC
  RECIPIENT CELL                                                                              from one bacterium (in the example
                                                                                      shown, a pathogen) into another; and
                                                                                                   conjugation (see Movie 23.1), during which
                                                   +              CONJUGATION        plasmid DNA, and even chromosomal
                                                                              DNA, is transferred from a donor to a
(B)             plasmid in donor cell                                                                        recipient bacterium.

=== Original PDF page 1357 ===
1318   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


                                                                                             Figure 23–5 Model for the evolution
                                                                   V. cholerae                                  of pathogenic V. cholerae strains.
                                                        progenitor                                   Progenitor strains in the wild first acquired
                                                                                                    the biosynthetic pathway necessary to
                                                                            make the O1 antigen type of carbohydrate
                                        O1 surface antigen                               chain (blue outline) on the outer-membrane
                                                                           LPS (see Figure 23–3C), a feature that
                                                                                                                                       is associated with the ability to cause
                                                                   V. cholerae             1961–2000          epidemic cholera disease. Incorporation
                                           O1 serogroup         WAVE 1              of the CTX bacteriophage created the
                                                                                                                 classical pathogenic strains responsible
                                 CTXClassical                           VSP-1                                         for the first six worldwide epidemics
                                            CTX-1        VSP-2                                      of cholera between 1817 and 1923.
                                            RS1                                        Sometime in the twentieth century, an
                                           V. cholerae                             V. cholerae              O1 strain in the environment picked up
                           O1 serogroup                O1 serogroup                  the CTX bacteriophage again, along
                                            Classical                                 El Tor                          with an associated bacteriophage RS1
                                                                                   and two pathogenicity islands (VSP-1
                      1st through 6th pandemics             7th pandemic                          and VSP-2), creating the El Tor (wave
                                                                                                                 1) strain that emerged as the seventh
                                                                            1991             worldwide pandemic in 1961. In the
                 O139                                       WAVE 2           1990s, an El Tor strain was isolated that
        1992                    antigen                     CTX-1                                      had picked up a new DNA cassette,
                     SXT                                              CTX-2,3,4,5,6                    enabling it to produce the O139 antigen
                                                                                                 type of carbohydrate chain (purple outline)
                                                                                                            rather than the O1 type. This altered the
                                                                                                    bacterium’s interaction with the human
                                                                              immune system without diminishing its
                                                                                                               virulence; this bacterium also picked
                                                                            2006           up a new pathogenicity island (SXT).                                  V. cholerae
                                                         WAVE 3             Separately, wave 2 strains emerged, in                      O139 serogroup
                                                                                         which CTX-1 was replaced with CTX-2–6
                                                                                                 bacteriophages. In 2006, wave 3 strains
                                                                                  emerged with variant CTX-3 and CTX-
                                                                                 6 bacteriophages. The history of the V.
                                                                                                  cholerae strains shown in this diagram
                                         CTX-3b                  CTX-6b                  was deduced by comparing the DNA
                                                                                Haiti 2010                   sequences of the genome of each strain to
                                                                                    one another and noting the key differences.
                                                                             An electron micrograph of V. cholerae is
variation is astonishing; the genomes of different strains of Escherichia coli can    shown in Figure 23–2B.
differ by as much as 25%. Such variation has led to the concept that a bacterial
species has both a core genome common to all isolates within the species and a
larger pangenome consisting of all genes present in the full spectrum of isolates.
   Acquisition of genes and gene clusters can drive the rapid evolution of
pathogens and turn nonpathogens into pathogens. Consider, for example, V.
cholerae—the Gram-negative bacterium that causes the epidemic diarrheal dis-
ease cholera. Of the hundreds of strains of V. cholerae, the only ones that cause
pandemic human disease are those infected (see Figure 23–4B) with a mobile bac-
teriophage (CTXϕ; hereafter referred to as CTX) containing genes encoding the
two subunits of the toxin that causes the diarrhea. As summarized in Figure 23–5,
seven pandemics of V. cholerae have arisen since 1817. The first six were caused
by the periodic reemergence of so-called classical strains. In addition to the
toxin-encoding bacteriophage, these strains shared a similar O1 surface antigen,
part of the LPS in the outer membrane (see Figure 23–3C). In 1961, the seventh
pandemic began, caused by a new strain named El Tor, now also called a wave
1 strain, which arose when an O1-expressing strain acquired CTX-1 and RS1ϕ
(hereafter referred to as RS1) bacteriophages and at least two new pathogenicity
islands. El Tor strains have now displaced the classical strains. In 1991, new wave
2 and early wave 3 strains emerged, in which CTX-1 was replaced with CTX-2–6
bacteriophages. In 1992, another new strain emerged in which O1 was replaced
with another variant called O139, which differs in a surface antigen, and thus was
not recognized by antibodies present in the blood of survivors of previous chol-
era epidemics. Then, in 2006, current wave 3 strains emerged, which include the
strain containing CTX-6b that caused the severe cholera outbreak in Haiti in 2010,
infecting more than 700,000 people and leading to approximately 8500 deaths.

=== Original PDF page 1358 ===
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                                                             1319


As this example makes clear, the rapid evolution of bacterial pathogens can be
likened to an arms race that pits the survival of a bacterium against our immune
systems and the tools of modern medicine. Similar struggles for survival take
place between all pathogens and humans, and understanding these conflicts
provides key insights into the evolution of pathogens and greatly informs how we
treat new outbreaks of infectious diseases.

Bacterial Virulence Genes Encode Toxins and Secretion Systems
That Deliver Effector Proteins to Host Cells

What are the gene products that enable a bacterium to cause disease in a
healthy host? The precise nature of these products differs between classes of
pathogens that are largely distinguished by whether they live outside of host
cells, so-called extracellular bacterial pathogens (discussed in this section),
or inside host cells, so-called intracellular bacterial pathogens (discussed in
a later section). For extracellular bacterial pathogens, virulence genes often
encode secreted toxic proteins (toxins) that are released by bacteria. These
toxins diffuse to target host cells, where they bind to specific receptors on
the cell surface and enter the cell, interfering with host-cell proteins to elicit
a response that is beneficial to the pathogen. Several of these bacterial tox-
ins are among the most potent of known human poisons. Bacterial toxins are
often composed of two protein components—an A subunit with enzymatic
activity, and a B subunit that binds to host-cell receptors and directs the traf-
ficking of the A subunit to the cytosol by various routes (Figure 23–6). The


                                                                                  cholera or
               anthrax toxin                                                         pertussis toxin

 B subunit                A subunits





               toxin receptor
  HOST-CELL
 CYTOSOL
                                                                                             Figure 23–6 Toxins released by bacteria
                                                                                        bind to and enter into host cells,                                                                     endosome
                                                                                                 disrupting host-cell processes. Bacterial
                                                                                                           toxins are often composed of A and
                                                                    B protein subunits. The B (binding) subunit
                         endosome                                                                   of the toxin, which interacts with host-
                                                                                                                                cell toxin receptors, can assemble after
                                                                                                    binding to toxin receptors (as with anthrax
                                                                                                                      toxin) or prior to receptor binding (as with
                                                                                                    cholera and pertussis toxins). Binding to
                                                                                                              toxin receptors enables endocytosis and
                                                                                                                          intracellular trafficking of the B subunits
                                                                                   and the associated and enzymatically                                                 Golgi
                                                                                                            active A subunit(s). In the case of
                                                                                                              Bacillus anthracis, the B subunit changes
                                           ER
                                                                                               conformation in the low-pH environment
                                                                                                               of the endosome to form a pore through
                                                                                         which two different A subunits, lethal factor
                                                                                   and edema factor, are transported across
                                                                                                    the membrane of the endosome in an
                                                                                                unfolded conformation. In the cases of V.                     A subunit in cytosol
                                                                                                  cholerae toxin and Bordetella pertussis
                                                                                                                    toxin, the B and A subunits are transported
                                                                                                          to the Golgi apparatus and then to the
         lethal factor         edema factor        cholera toxin       pertussis toxin                  endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where the
                                                                       A subunits are then translocated into
  cleaves MAPKK members,
 inﬂammasome components   raises cAMP levels    raises cAMP levels   raises cAMP levels                  the cytosol in an unfolded conformation
                                                                                               through a protein-translocation channel
   drop in blood pressure       edema              diarrhea        inhibits immunity                   (see Movie 23.2).

=== Original PDF page 1359 ===
1320   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


two subunits of cholera toxin, for example, are encoded by the V. cholerae
CTX phage (see Figure 23–5), which is incorporated into the bacterial genome
(Movie 23.2). The A subunit catalyzes the transfer of an ADP-ribose moi-
ety from NAD+ to the trimeric G protein Gs. This ADP ribosylation alters the
G-protein α subunit so that it can no longer hydrolyze its bound GTP, causing it
to remain in an active state that stimulates adenylyl cyclase indefinitely (see
Chapter 15). The resulting prolonged elevation in cAMP concentration within
intestinal epithelial cells causes a large efflux of Cl– and water into the gut,
thereby causing the severe diarrhea that characterizes cholera. Released bacte-
ria then contaminate food and water, spreading infection to new hosts.
  Some pathogenic bacteria secrete multiple toxins, each of which targets a dif-
ferent signaling pathway in host cells. Anthrax, for example, is an acute infectious
disease of sheep, cattle, and occasionally humans. It is caused by contact with
spores of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus anthracis. Dormant spores can
survive in soil for long periods. If inhaled, ingested, or rubbed into breaks in the
skin, spores can germinate and the bacteria replicate. The bacteria secrete two
toxins with identical B subunits but different A subunits. The B subunits bind to
a host-cell surface receptor protein to transfer the two different A subunits into
host cells (see Figure 23–6). The A subunits are called lethal factor and edema
factor. The latter is a calmodulin-dependent adenylyl cyclase that catalyzes the
production of cyclic AMP (see Figure 15–26). Injection of edema toxin into the
bloodstream of an animal leads to an ion imbalance that can cause an accumu-
lation of extracellular fluid (edema) in the intestine and liver. Lethal toxin is a
protease that cleaves several activated members of the mitogen-activated pro-
tein kinase kinase (MAP kinase kinase; MAPKK) family (see Figure 15–50) and
components of the inflammasome (see Chapter 24), disrupting intracellular
signaling and leading to immune-cell dysfunction. In animals, lethal toxin targets
cells of the cardiovascular system, causing shock (a large fall in blood pressure)
and death.
   Whereas toxins are released and diffuse to target cells, pathogens that physi­
cally contact host cells often possess specialized contact-dependent secretion
systems that directly inject so-called  effector proteins from the bacterium
into host cells. There are several such secretion systems, and we will limit our
discussion to two that are present in Gram-negative bacteria and play import-
ant roles in bacterial pathogenesis: the type III secretion system (Figure 23–7)
and the type IV secretion system. The injection of effector proteins, as depicted
to occur via the type III secretion system in Figure 23–7, can elicit a variety of

                                                              (B)                                           Figure 23–7 Contact-dependent type III
                                                          effector protein                                secretion systems can deliver effector
                                                       secreted                                       proteins from the cytosol of a bacterium
                                                         into host cell                                      directly into the host cell. (A) Electron          (A)     injectisomes
                                                                                            micrograph of type III secretion systems on
                                                                                                    the surface of a bacterial cell, each of which
                                                                                                      consists of more than two dozen proteins.
                                                       host cell             injectisome                    (B) The large lower ring is embedded in
                                                  plasma              (type III                    the bacterial inner membrane, and the
                                            membrane           secretion                    smaller upper ring is embedded in the
                                                                           apparatus)                   bacterial outer membrane. During infection,
                                                                                            docking of the tip of the hollow needle at a
                                                                                                               host-cell plasma membrane results in the                                        outer
                              membrane                                                       secretion of bacterial translocator proteins
                                                                                                          (dark green), which form a pore in the host
                                          inner                                              membrane. Bacterial effector proteins
                              membrane                                                             (blue) are initially bound to chaperone
                                                                                                         proteins in the bacterial cytosol (light
                                                                                                          green), which keep them in an unfolded
                                                                                                  conformation. Unfolded effector proteins
                                                                                               then pass through the injectisome and
                         50 nm                     effector              chaperone                are secreted into the host cell, where
                                                       protein                protein                   they fold into their active conformation.
                                                produced in                                           (A, Hu et al., Cell 168:1065–1074, 2017.
                                                   bacterium
                                                                                            With permission from Elsevier.)

=== Original PDF page 1360 ===
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                                                             1321


host-cell responses. For extracellular pathogens, it can enable the bacterium
to block phagocytosis by immune cells. For intracellular pathogens, it can pro-
mote phagocytosis by nonimmune cells, or survival inside cells. The type III
and type IV secretion systems appear to have evolved independently. There is
a remarkable degree of structural similarity between type III secretion systems
and the bacterial flagellum (see Figures 23–2B and 23–3D), suggesting they
have a common evolutionary origin. Similarly, type IV secretion systems are
closely related to the conjugation apparatus that many bacteria use to exchange
genetic material (see Figure 23–4B). Although the mechanism of effector pro-
tein translocation through the type III and type IV secretion systems is not
well understood, the inner diameter of the type III secretion system needle is
only approximately 2 nm, so proteins must be moved through in an unfolded
conformation.

Fungal and Protozoan Parasites Have Complex Life Cycles
Involving Multiple Forms

Pathogenic fungi and protozoan parasites are eukaryotes, as are their hosts.
Because antifungal and antiparasitic drugs often target core molecules that are
similar between parasite and host, they can be less effective and more toxic to the
host than are antibiotics that target bacteria. A second characteristic of fungal and
parasitic infections that makes them difficult to treat is the tendency of the patho-
gens to switch among several different forms during their life cycles. A drug that
is effective at killing one form can be ineffective at killing another form; therefore,
the population of the pathogen can survive the treatment.
   Fungi include both unicellular yeasts (such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which are used to bake bread and brew beer, and as
model organisms for cell biology research) and filamentous, multicellular molds
(like those found on moldy fruit or bread; see Figure 23–2D). Most of the impor­
tant pathogenic fungi exhibit dimorphism—the ability to grow in either yeast or
mold form. The yeast-to-mold or mold-to-yeast transition is frequently associated
with infection. Histoplasma capsulatum, for example, grows as a mold at low tem-
                                                                                             Figure 23–8 Dimorphism in theperature in the soil, but it switches to a yeast form when inhaled into the lung,                                                                                       pathogenic fungus Histoplasma
where it can cause the disease histoplasmosis (Figure 23–8). The most common    capsulatum. (A) At low temperature
human fungal pathogen, Candida albicans, which often exists as a resident of the      in the soil, H. capsulatum grows as a
human oral and gastrointestinal microbiota and is also an opportunistic patho-      multicellular filamentous mold consisting of
gen that can cause serious disease in immunocompromised people by entering    many individual cells connected together.
                                                                                                                      (B) After it is inhaled into the lung of a
the bloodstream and rapidly dividing.                                                                               mammal, the increase in temperature to
   Protozoan parasites are single-celled eukaryotes with more elaborate life    37°C causes a switch to a yeast form
cycles than fungi, and they frequently require more than one host. Malaria is the     consisting of small clumps of round cells.
most devastating protozoal disease, infecting more than 200 million people every      (C) A stained histologic section of a mouse
year and killing upward of 400,000. It is caused by four species of Plasmodium,     lung infected with H. capsulatum, showing
                                                                                       a macrophage containing yeast forms of
which are transmitted to humans by the bite of the female Anopheles mosquito.                                                                                                    the pathogen. (A and B, courtesy of Sinem
Plasmodium falciparum causes the most serious form of malaria and is the most    Beyhan and Anita Sil; C, courtesy of Davina
intensively studied of the malaria-causing parasites. It exists in many distinct    Hocking Murray and Anita Sil.)



                                                                                                                           yeast-form cells
                                                                                                                                           in macrophage





 (A) MOLD FORM                                                       (B) YEAST FORM
      in the environment                                               10 µm           in the host                           10 µm      (C)
                                                                                                                            10 µm

=== Original PDF page 1361 ===
1322   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


                                                                                             Figure 23–9 The complex life cycle of                                       mosquito             sporozoites
                                            sucks blood          migrate to the                        malaria parasites. (A) The sexual cycle of
                                    and injects                   liver                          Plasmodium falciparum requires passage
                                           sporozoites                                         between a human host and an insect host
                                                                               Kupffer cell           (see Movie 23.3). (B–D) Blood smears from
             release of sporozoites                         epithelium                               people with malaria, showing three different
         and migration to salivary                                                             BLOOD            forms of the parasite that appear in red
                   gland                              hepatocyte              VESSEL             blood cells: B, ring stage; C, schizont;
                                                                                   and D, gametocyte. (B–D, courtesy of the
                                                                                             Centers for Disease Control, Division of
                 REPLICATION                           REPLICATION                                                                                                               Parasitic Diseases, DPDx.)
                                                                   LIVER


                                                                         merozoites

                                                                              infection of red
                                                                     blood cells
                                                                       schizont
          ookinete          MOSQUITO       HUMAN
                            HOST            HOST
                                                                                               ring
                                                                                         stage
        zygote
                                                                      REPLICATION


              fertilization     gametocytes
                               differentiate                 gametocytes
                              into gametes


                                       mosquito
                                            sucks blood
                                   and picks up
 (A)                                   gametocytes





(B)                                   (C)                                 (D)
                      5 µm                       10 µm                          10 µm


forms, and it requires both the human and mosquito hosts to complete its sexual
cycle (Figure 23–9A and Movie 23.3). Several of these forms are highly special-
ized to invade and replicate in specific tissues—the lining of the insect gut, the
human liver, and the human red blood cell. Even within a single host-cell type,
the red blood cell, the Plasmodium parasite undergoes a complex sequence of
developmental events, reflected in striking morphological changes (Figure 23–9B,
C, and D).

All Aspects of Viral Propagation Depend on Host-Cell Machinery

Bacteria, fungal, and protozoan pathogens are themselves living cells. They use
their own machinery for DNA replication, transcription, and translation, and, for
the most part, they provide their own sources of metabolic energy from nutrients
in their environment. Viruses, by contrast, are the ultimate hitchhikers, carrying
little more than genetic information in the form of nucleic acid. Many clinically

=== Original PDF page 1362 ===
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                                                             1323



 TABLE 23–1 Viruses That Cause Human Disease

  Virus                        Genome type                        Disease

 Adenovirus                          Double-stranded DNA                    Respiratory disease

  Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)              Double-stranded DNA                     Infectious mononucleosis

 Herpes simplex virus 1                Double-stranded DNA                   Recurrent cold sores

 Human papillomavirus                Double-stranded DNA                   Warts, cancer

  Varicella-zoster virus                  Double-stranded DNA                 Chickenpox and shingles

 Smallpox virus (Variola)                Double-stranded DNA                  Smallpox

  Hepatitis-B virus                       Part single-, part double-stranded DNA   Hepatitis B

 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)    Single-stranded RNA [+] strand          Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)

 Coronavirus                           Single-stranded RNA [+] strand       Common cold, respiratory disease, COVID-19

  Hepatitis-A virus                       Single-stranded RNA [+] strand           Hepatitis A

  Hepatitis-C virus                       Single-stranded RNA [+] strand           Hepatitis C

  Poliovirus                             Single-stranded RNA [+] strand           Poliomyelitis

  Rhinovirus                            Single-stranded RNA [+] strand       Common cold

  Yellow fever virus                      Single-stranded RNA [+] strand          Yellow fever

  Zika virus                             Single-stranded RNA [+] strand          Zika virus disease

 Ebola virus                            Single-stranded RNA [–] strand          Ebola virus disease

  Influenza virus type A                  Single-stranded RNA [–] strand           Respiratory disease (flu)

 Measles virus                         Single-stranded RNA [–] strand          Measles

 Mumps virus                          Single-stranded RNA [–] strand        Mumps

 Rabies virus                           Single-stranded RNA [–] strand          Rabies


                                                                                         DNA
                                                                                                                                      virus
important human viruses have relatively small genomes consisting of double-                              coat protein
stranded DNA or single-stranded RNA [either positive (+) sense RNA that can          1  ENTRY INTO HOST CELL
be directly translated into proteins or negative (–) sense RNA that must be rep­          AND UNCOATING OF DNA
licated to produce (+) sense RNA] (Table 23–1). We now have complete genome      host cell
sequences of almost all of them.                                                                          2
    Viral genomes typically encode three types of protein: proteins for replicat-
ing the genome, proteins for packaging the genome and delivering it to more                      DNA
host cells, and proteins for modifying the structure or function of the host cell
to enhance the replication of the virus. In general, viral replication involves the         TRANSCRIPTION    REPLICATION
following sequence of steps: (1) entry into the host cell, (2) disassembly of the        4                             3                                                                                       RNA
infectious virus particle, (3) replication of the viral genome, (4) transcription of                            DNA
viral genes and synthesis of viral proteins, (5) assembly of these viral components            TRANSLATION
into progeny virus particles, and (6) release of progeny virions (Figure 23–10).
A single virus particle (a virion) that infects a single host cell can produce
thousands of progeny.                                                                                coat            5                                                                                                             protein

                                                                                             ASSEMBLY OF PROGENY
                                                                                                      VIRUS PARTICLES AND
Figure 23–10 A simple viral life cycle. The hypothetical simple virus shown here consists of a                    EXIT FROM HOST CELL
small double-stranded DNA molecule that codes for only a single viral capsid protein. To reproduce,
the viral genome must (1) enter a host cell, where it (2) disassembles and releases its genetic
material. The genome is (3) replicated to produce multiple copies, and (4) transcribed and translated
                                                                                                       6to produce the viral coat protein. The viral genomes can then (5) assemble spontaneously with the
coat protein to form a new virus particle, which (6) escapes from the host cell. No known virus is
this simple.

=== Original PDF page 1363 ===
1324   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection





                                                             poliovirus
                               Zika virus


 inﬂuenza                                                                           coronavirus    virus

                                           100 nm
                                                                                                                        poxvirus

                                                                                                                        100 nm





          Ebola virus                    rabies virus    mumps virus   HIV (AIDS virus)             herpesvirus          adenovirus    papillomavirus

                          RNA VIRUSES                                             DNA VIRUSES


   Virions come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes (Figure 23–11), and although     Figure 23–11 Examples of viral
most have relatively small genomes, genome size can vary considerably. A giant    morphology. As shown, both DNA and
virus of amoebae, called pithovirus, was recently revived from a 30,000-year-old   RNA viruses vary greatly in both size
                                                                                   and shape. Although there is a generalice core harvested from permafrost in Siberia and is the largest known virus by                                                                                                              correlation between virus physical size
physical size, with 1.5-µm-long particles and a double-stranded DNA genome of    and genome size, there are likely to be
610,000 nucleotides. The virions of poxviruses are also large: they are 250–350 nm      outliers such as Ebola virus, which has a
long and enclose a genome of double-stranded DNA of about 270,000 nucleo-     large physical size but a smaller genome
tides. At the other end of the size scale are the virions of parvovirus, which are less     size suggesting a lower degree of genome
                                                                                            compaction.than 30 nm in diameter and have a single-stranded DNA genome of fewer than
5000 nucleotides.
    Viral genomes are packaged in a protein coat, called a capsid, which in some
viruses is further enclosed by a lipid bilayer membrane, or envelope. The capsid
is made of one or several proteins, arranged in regular arrays that often produce
structures with either helical symmetry, which results in a cylindrical structure
(for example, influenza, measles, and bunyavirus), or icosahedral symmetry (for
example, poliovirus and herpesvirus; see Figure 23–11). Other viruses instead
produce capsids with more complicated or irregular structures (for example,
poxviruses and Ebola virus; see Figure 23–11). A capsid packaged with the viral



                                                     capsid containing
                                                                viral chromosome       transmembrane
                                                     (nucleocapsid)               viral envelope
                                                                               proteins


                                                                          nucleocapsid induces
                                                                       assembly of
                                                                     envelope proteins
                                                         capsid
                                                        protein                                                                                             Figure 23–12 Acquisition of a viral
                                                                                          envelope. (A) Electron micrograph of an
                                                                                                 animal cell from which several copies of
                                                                  viral                                      an enveloped virus (Semliki Forest virus)
                                        genome              BUDDING                                                                                                     are budding. (B) Schematic drawing of                                       (DNA or RNA)
                                                                                                    the envelope assembly and budding
                                                                                                processes. The lipid bilayer that surrounds
                                                                                                    the viral capsid is derived directly from
                                                                                                    the plasma membrane of the host cell. In
                                                                                                           contrast, the proteins in this lipid bilayer
                                                                 lipid bilayer                                 (shown in green) are encoded by the
                                                                                                                                       viral genome. (A, from A. Loewy et al., J.
                                                                           progeny               Virol. 69:469–475, 1995. Reproduced with
                                                                                                virus              permission from the American Society for    (A)                                            (B)
                               100 nm                                                                Microbiology.)

=== Original PDF page 1364 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1325


          70                                                               100               Figure 23–13 Effective control of a viral
                                                                                                              (%)            disease through vaccination. The graph
                                                                                 shows the number of cases of poliomyelitis                      (×1000) 50                                                                                      reported per year worldwide (blue line) and
                                  immunization coverage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      coverage             the global immunization coverage as a
                  cases                                                                 50                percentage of the human population (red
          30
                                                                                                                                          line). As immunization coverage increased,                                    global reported polio cases
                                                                                                disease incidence decreased. (Figure                            reported 10                                                                         based on information found at https://                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        immunization               polioeradication.org.)           0                                                               0
            1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005    2010   2015  2019


genome is called a nucleocapsid. The nucleocapsids of nonenveloped viruses
usually leave an infected cell by lysing it. For enveloped viruses, by contrast, the
nucleocapsid is enclosed within a lipid bilayer membrane that the virus acquires
in the process of budding from the host-cell plasma membrane, which it does
without disrupting the membrane or killing the cell (Figure 23–12).
   Because the host cell performs most of the critical steps in viral replication, the
identification of effective antiviral drugs that do not harm the host can be difficult.
The most effective strategy for containing viral diseases is through vaccination of
potential hosts. For example, a highly successful vaccination program eradicated
smallpox infection from the planet by 1980. Vaccines effective against poliovi-
rus, which causes poliomyelitis and paralysis, have existed since the 1950s, and
a more recent global vaccination initiative, begun in 1988, seeks to completely
eradicate poliovirus infection. The number of poliomyelitis cases worldwide has
declined from an estimated 350,000 in 1988, to 176 in 2019, and there is hope of
eradication in the coming years (Figure 23–13).

Summary

Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens, which include viruses, bacteria, and
fungi, as well as protozoan and metazoan parasites. All pathogens must have mech-
anisms for entering their host and for evading immediate destruction by the host.
Pathogenic bacteria produce specific virulence factors that mediate their interac-
tions with the host; these proteins change the behavior of host cells in ways that
promote the replication and spread of the bacteria. Eukaryotic pathogens such as
fungi and protozoan parasites typically pass through several different forms during
the course of infection; the ability to switch among these forms is usually required
for these pathogens to survive in a host and cause disease. In some cases, such as
malaria, parasites must pass sequentially through several host species to complete
their life cycles. Unlike bacteria and eukaryotic parasites, viruses have no metabo-
lism of their own and no intrinsic ability to produce the proteins encoded by their
DNA or RNA genomes; they rely on subverting the machinery of their host cell.

CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION
The mechanisms through which pathogens cause disease are extremely diverse.
Nonetheless, all pathogens must carry out certain common tasks: they must
gain access to the host, reach an appropriate growth niche, avoid host defenses,
replicate, and exit from the infected host to spread to an uninfected one. In this
section, we examine the cell-biological strategies that many pathogens use to
accomplish these tasks. We describe how pathogens initially gain access to the
host by overcoming epithelial barriers and colonizing epithelia. We then recount
how extracellular pathogens disturb host cells without entering them to estab-
lish a niche and avoid host defenses. We next cover the myriad ways in which
intracellular pathogens, the master manipulators of host-cell biology, enter host
cells, reach an appropriate niche in the cytosol or in a membrane-bound com-
partment, avoid or alter membrane traffic, mobilize the cytoskeleton, manipulate
autophagy, and take over metabolism. Finally, we cover how pathogen evolution
shapes the immune avoidance and drug resistance.

=== Original PDF page 1365 ===
1326   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection

Pathogens Breach Epithelial Barriers to Infect the Host

The first step in infection is for the pathogen to gain access to the host. A thick
covering of skin protects most parts of the human body from the environment.
The protective boundaries of some other human tissues (eyes, nasal passages,
respiratory tract, mouth, digestive tract, urinary tract, and female genital tract)
are less robust. In the lungs and small intestine, for example, the barrier is just
a single monolayer of epithelial cells. Nonetheless, all these epithelia serve as
barriers to infection.
  Wounds in barrier epithelia are one way for pathogens to gain direct access
to unoccupied niches within otherwise sterile host tissues. This avenue of entry
requires little in the way of pathogen specialization, and some pathogens can
cause serious illness if they enter through such wounds. Staphylococci from the
skin and nose and streptococci from the throat and mouth are two examples of
opportunistic bacterial pathogens that can be residents of the normal microbiota
(described in more detail in the final section of this chapter) in certain individu-
als, yet are also responsible for many serious infections resulting from breaches in
epithelial barriers. The emergence of bacterial strains of Staphylococcus that are
resistant to the antibiotics commonly used for treatment (for example, methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, which can cause serious skin and tissue
infections) is of particular concern. Papillomaviruses, which cause warts and
cervical cancer, also take advantage of breaches in epithelial barriers.
   Another efficient way for a pathogen to cross the skin is to catch a ride in the
saliva of a biting arthropod. A diverse group of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa has
developed the ability to survive in arthropods that they use as vectors for transmis-
sion to a mammalian host. Many zoonoses, a term that refers to diseases spread to
humans from other animals, are spread in this way. As discussed earlier, the Plas-
modium protozoan that causes malaria develops through several forms in its life
cycle, including some that are specialized for survival in a human and others that
are specialized for survival in a mosquito vector (see Figure 23–9). Viruses that are
spread by mosquito bites also cause yellow fever, dengue fever, as well as Zika virus
disease—the latter garnered worldwide attention during an epidemic in 2015–2016,
and although Zika infection is often asymptomatic in adults, in pregnant women it
                                                                                                esophagus           midgut
can cause birth defects in the fetus. These three viruses replicate in both insect cells
and mammalian cells, as required for their transmission by an insect vector.
   The efficient spread of a pathogen via an insect vector requires that an indi-
vidual insect consumes a blood meal from an infected host and transfers the
pathogen to a nonimmune host. In a few striking cases, the behavior of the insect
is altered by the pathogen so that its transmission to a new host is more likely. An
example is the bacterium Yersinia pestis, which causes bubonic plague. It mul-
tiplies in the flea’s foregut to form aggregated masses that physically block the
digestive tract; during each repeated, but futile, attempt at feeding, some of the
bacteria in the foregut are flushed into the bite site, thus transmitting plague to a
new host (Figure 23–14).
                                                                                                                           100 µm
Pathogens That Colonize an Epithelium Must Overcome Its
                                                                                             Figure 23–14 Plague bacteria within
Protective Mechanisms                                                      a flea. This light micrograph shows the
                                                                                                           digestive tract dissected from a flea that
Epithelial barriers such as the skin lining of the mouth and large intestine are    had dined about 2 weeks previously on the
densely populated by the microbiota, whereas others, including the lining of the     blood of an animal infected with the plague
lower lung and the bladder, are more sparsely populated. Nevertheless, these epi-     bacterium, Yersinia pestis. The bacteria
thelial barriers have mechanisms to prevent excessive microbial colonization. A     multiplied in the flea gut to produce large
                                                                                               cohesive aggregates (red arrows); the
layer of protective mucus covers the respiratory epithelium, and the coordinated                                                                                                                bacterial mass on the left is occluding
beating of motile cilia sweeps the mucus and trapped bacteria up and out of the     the passage between the esophagus and
lung. The epithelial lining of the bladder and the upper gastrointestinal tract also     the midgut. This type of blockage prevents
has a thick layer of mucus, and these organs are periodically flushed by urination    a flea from digesting its blood meals, so
and by peristalsis, respectively, which washes away microbes.                               that hunger causes it to bite repeatedly,
                                                                                                   disseminating the infection. (From B.J.
   Pathogens that infect these epithelial surfaces, including pathogenic bacte-                                                                                            Hinnebusch, E.R. Fischer, and T.G.
ria and eukaryotic parasites, have evolved specific features to overcome these    Schwan, J. Infect. Dis. 178:1406–1415,
protective mechanisms. Those that infect the urinary tract, for example, adhere     1998.)

=== Original PDF page 1366 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1327



                                                                                                                       kidney
                                                                                                                                             epithelial
                                                                                                                                                               cell

                                                                                                                                   glycolipid
                                                                                                adaptor        adhesin
                                                                                                          proteins


                                                                                                                                      pilus

                                                                                                         mucus





(A)                                                                (B)                                                 (C)      bacterium
                                       5 µm                                   1 µm

tightly to the epithelial lining via specific adhesins, which are proteins or protein     Figure 23–15 Pathogenic E. coli in
complexes that recognize and bind to cell-surface molecules on the epithelium.     the infected bladder of a mouse.
An important group of adhesins in E. coli strains that infect the kidney are compo-      (A) Scanning electron micrograph of
nents of pili—surface projections that can be several micrometers long and thus     uropathogenic E. coli, a common cause of
                                                                                                 bladder and kidney infections. The bacteria
able to span the thickness of the protective mucus layer; at the tip of each pilus is                                                                                                     are attached to the surface of epithelial
an adhesin protein that binds tightly to the d-galactose–d-galactose disaccharide      cells lining the infected bladder. (B) A close-
on glycolipids on the surface of kidney cells (Figure 23–15). Strains of E. coli that    up view of one of the bacteria showing the
infect the bladder rather than the kidney express a second kind of pilus with a        pili on its surface. (C) An E. coli pilus spans
different adhesin protein that binds to d-mannose–decorated proteins on blad-     the mucus layer and has adaptor proteins
                                                                                  on its tip that bind to glycolipids on the
der epithelial cells. It is the specificity of the adhesin proteins on the tips of the                                                                                                    surface of kidney cells. (A, from G.E. Soto
two types of pili that is responsible for the bacteria colonizing different parts of    and S.J. Hultgren, J. Bacteriol. 181:1059–
the urinary tract.                                                                        1071, 1999. With permission from the
   The epithelial lining of the stomach is an especially hostile environment for    American Society for Microbiology; B, from
                                                                                           D.G. Thanassi and S.J. Hultgren, Methodsmicrobes. Besides the thick layer of mucus and peristaltic washing, the acidic pH                                                                                          20:111–126, 2000. With permission from
(average pH ≈ 2) is lethal to almost all bacteria ingested in food. Yet, the stomach      Elsevier.)
is home to resident microbial species including H. pylori, which persists for life
as part of the stomach microbiota of approximately half of all humans on Earth.
Although it does not cause disease in most individuals, H. pylori can cause stom-
ach ulcers and cancers. The hypothesis that a persistent bacterial infection could
cause stomach ulcers was initially met with skepticism. The young Australian
doctor who made the initial discovery finally proved the point: he drank a pure
culture of bacteria and developed inflammation of the stomach, which often pre-
cedes the development of ulcers. Antibiotics can now effectively cure a patient
of recurrent ulcers. H. pylori has several adaptations that allow it to colonize
the harsh environment in the stomach (Figure 23–16). One is to use its flagella



               mucus                              ammonia                                                                                             Figure 23–16 H. pylori interaction with                                       neutralizes
                                stomach acid            help motility and                            epithelial cells in the stomach lining.
                                                         penetration of mucus                     These bacteria colonize the gastric                                 NH3
                     urea                                      ﬂagella                               epithelium by using their flagella to swim
                                                                                               through the mucus layer lining the stomach
                                                                                   and attach to the surface of epithelial
                                                                                                                             cells. H. pylori produces the enzyme
                          urea
                                                                                                    urease, which converts urea obtained                                 NH3                               urease                                ammonia                                                 from the environment into ammonia that is
                                                                                                    released and neutralizes acid surrounding
                                                                                                    the bacterium, raising the pH in its local
             STOMACH LUMEN                              H. pylori                            environment. H. pylori also uses its type
                                                   type IV                                               IV secretion system to secrete the effector
                                                       secretion                                            protein CagA, which assists in colonization
                  plasma membrane                                                             but also causes chronic disruption of host-
                    of host cell lining       injection of                                                              cell pathways and prolonged inflammation,
                   the stomach          effectors/CagA                                          which predisposes infected individuals to
                                                                                                              gastric ulcers and cancer.

=== Original PDF page 1367 ===
1328   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


for chemotactic motility, allowing it to penetrate mucus and seek out the more
neutral pH near the surface of gastric epithelial cells. Another is to produce the
enzyme urease, which converts urea to ammonia to neutralize the acid in its
immediate vicinity.

Extracellular Pathogens Use Toxins and Contact-dependent
Secretion Systems to Disturb Host Cells Without Entering Them
Extracellular pathogens adhere to epithelial and other surfaces without enter-
ing their underlying host cells. Many such pathogens exert effects on the host by
secreting toxins that diffuse to target cells. For example, Bordetella pertussis, the
bacterium that causes whooping cough, colonizes the respiratory epithelium and
circumvents the normal mechanism that clears the respiratory tract by expressing
adhesins that bind ciliated epithelial cells. The adherent bacteria also produce
toxins that eventually kill the ciliated cells, compromising the host’s ability to clear
the infection. The most familiar of these is pertussis toxin, which, like the cholera
toxin discussed earlier (both are shown in Figure 23–6), has an A subunit that
ADP-ribosylates the α subunit of the G protein Gi, causing the G protein to remain     Figure 23–17 Interaction of
in the inactive GDP-bound state and preventing it from inhibiting the activity    enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) with
of the host cell’s adenylyl cyclase, thereby increasing the production of cyclic    host intestinal epithelial cells. (A) When
                                                                       EPEC contacts an epithelial cell in the lining
AMP. This toxin also interferes with the chemotactic pathway that neutrophils                                                                                                              of the human gut, it delivers a bacterial
use to seek out and destroy bacteria (see Figures 16–3 and 16–81). B. pertussis     protein called Tir into the host cell through
colonization of the respiratory tract causes severe coughing, which helps spread    a type III secretion system. Tir then inserts
the infection.                                                                                                into the plasma membrane of the host
                                                                                                                                     cell, where it functions as a receptor   Other extracellular pathogens use contact-dependent secretion systems to
                                                                                                                       for the bacterial adhesin protein intimin.
directly inject bacterial effector proteins into the host cells to which they adhere.     Next, a host-cell protein tyrosine kinase
An example is H. pylori, which infects the stomach epithelium as described     phosphorylates the intracellular domain
above. The H. pylori genome contains a pathogenicity island (see Figure 23–4A)      of Tir on tyrosines. Phosphorylated Tir
that encodes a type IV secretion system and the effector protein CagA, which is      recruits host-cell proteins [including an
                                                                                              adaptor protein, a nucleation-promotinginjected by the secretion system into the host cell (Figure 23–16). CagA helps the                                                                                                              factor (NPF), and the Arp2/3 complex] that
bacterium persist in the stomach by affecting cell movement, inducing inflam-      trigger actin polymerization (see Figure
mation, altering host gene expression, changing cell proliferation and apoptosis,     16–12). Consequently, a branched network
and disrupting cell–cell junctions. However, chronic alteration of these pathways      of actin filaments assembles underneath
is also a predisposing factor for gastric ulcers and cancer.                                 the bacterium, forming an actin pedestal
                                                                                                      (see Movie 23.4). (B) EPEC on a pedestal.
   Another example is enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), which causes diarrhea                                                                                                                       In this fluorescence micrograph, the DNA
and can be lethal to young children. EPEC uses a type III secretion system (see      of the EPEC and host cell is labeled in
Figure 23–7) to deliver its own special receptor protein (called Tir) into the plasma     blue, Tir protein is labeled in green, and
membrane of a host intestinal epithelial cell (Figure 23–17 and Movie 23.4). The      host-cell actin filaments are labeled in red.
extracellular domain of Tir binds to the bacterial surface protein intimin, trigger-    The inset shows a close-up view of the two
                                                                                         upper bacteria on pedestals. (B, from D.
ing actin polymerization in the host cell that results in the formation of a unique                                                                                  Goosney et al., Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.
cell-surface protrusion called a pedestal; this pushes the tightly adherent bacte-    16:173–189, 2000. With permission from
ria up about 1–5 µm from the host-cell membrane, thereby promoting bacterial     Annual Reviews.)




                  outer membrane                         intimin
                             inner membrane                                    phosphorylated
                                                                                                       Tir
enteropathogenic                intimin
E. coli                                                   P   P   P                host proteins
                                         pedestal                                         that promote
                                                                                                 actin
  type III                                                                                       polymerization  secretion               Tir
  system

 HOST
 CELL                                                                                     actin ﬁlaments


            injected Tir inserts and
           folds in plasma membrane

(A)                                                                                                                      (B)
                                                                                                                        20 µm

=== Original PDF page 1368 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1329


movement along the cell surface by a mechanism described later for the actin-
based motility of intracellular pathogens. A similar strategy is used by vaccinia
virus (the virus that was used as a vaccine to eradicate smallpox) to form mobile
actin-rich membrane extensions, which promote spread of the virus from cell to
cell. The study of how EPEC and vaccinia virus promote actin polymerization has
been of major importance in understanding how intracellular signaling pathways
regulate the cytoskeleton in normal, uninfected cells (discussed in Chapter 16).
Although actin mobilization promotes the spread of these pathogens, the symp-
toms of EPEC infection (severe diarrhea) are caused by the loss of absorptive
microvilli and disruption of signaling pathways in epithelial cells, which are trig-
gered by Tir and other secreted bacterial effector proteins.

Intracellular Pathogens Have Mechanisms for Both Entering
and Leaving Host Cells
Intracellular pathogens have to cross barriers, adhere to host cells, and also enter
host cells to cause disease. These include all viruses and many bacteria and pro-
tozoa. Each of these has a preferred niche for replication and survival within host
cells. Bacteria and protozoa replicate either in the cytosol or within a membrane-
enclosed compartment. While most RNA viruses replicate within the cytosol,
most DNA viruses replicate in the nucleus (poxviruses are a notable exception).
Life inside a host cell has several advantages. The pathogens are not accessible to
antibodies, nor are they easy targets for phagocytic cells (discussed in Chapter 24);
furthermore, intracellular bacteria and protozoa are bathed in a rich source of
nutrients, and viruses have access to the host cell’s biosynthetic machinery for
their reproduction. This lifestyle, however, requires that the pathogen have mech-
anisms for entering host cells, for finding a suitable subcellular niche where it can
replicate, and for exiting from the infected cell to spread the infection. Below we
consider some of the myriad ways that individual intracellular pathogens exploit
and modify host-cell biology to satisfy these requirements.

Viruses Bind to Virus Receptors at the Host-Cell Surface

The first step in infection for any intracellular pathogen is to bind to the surface of
the host target cell. Viruses accomplish this by the binding of viral surface proteins
to virus receptors, which are cell-surface proteins that perform various functions
in uninfected cells and have been co-opted as binding sites for viral proteins. The
first virus receptor identified was an E. coli surface protein that is recognized by
the bacteriophage lambda; the protein normally functions to transport the sugar
maltose from outside the bacterium to the inside where it is used as an energy
source. Receptors need not be proteins, however: an envelope protein of herpes
simplex virus, for example, binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (discussed in
Chapter 19) on the surface of certain vertebrate host cells, and simian virus 40
(SV40) binds to a glycolipid. The specificity of virus–receptor interactions often
serves as a barrier preventing the spread of a virus from one species to another.
Acquiring the ability to bind to a new receptor often requires multiple changes in
a virus, but it can be crucial in allowing the cross-species transmission that can
result in new disease outbreaks.
   Viruses that infect animal cells generally exploit cell-surface receptor mole-
cules that are either ubiquitous [such as angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
used by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2] or are found uniquely on those cell types
in which the virus replicates (such as the neuron-specific proteins used by rabies
virus). Although a virus usually uses a single type of host-cell receptor, some
viruses use more than one type. An important example is HIV, which requires two
types of receptors to enter a host cell. Its primary receptor is CD4, a cell-surface
protein on helper T cells and macrophages that is involved in immune recog-
nition (discussed in Chapter 24). It also requires a co-receptor, which is either
CCR5 (a receptor for β-chemokines) or CXCR4 (a receptor for α-chemokines),
depending on the particular variant of the virus; macrophages are susceptible

=== Original PDF page 1369 ===
1330   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


                                                                                             Figure 23–18 Receptor and co-receptors
          HIV                                             HIV                                     for HIV. All strains of HIV require the
                         β-chemokine                                     α-chemokine       CD4 protein as a primary receptor. Early
                            receptor (CCR5)                                       receptor (CXCR4)        in an infection, most of the viruses use
          CD4                                       CD4                                                                    CCR5 as a co-receptor, allowing them to
                                                                                                                     infect macrophages and their precursors,
                                                                                         monocytes. As the infection progresses,
                                                                                         mutant variants of the virus arise that now
                                                                                        use CXCR4 as a co-receptor, enabling
                                                                                  them to infect helper T cells efficiently. The
                                                                                                            natural ligand for the chemokine receptors
                                                                                                    (Sdf1 for CXCR4; RANTES, MIP-1α, or                                               α-chemokine
 β-chemokine                                              (Sdf1)                                   MIP-1β for CCR5) blocks co-receptor
 (RANTES, MIP-1α,                                                                                       function and prevents viral invasion.
 or MIP-1β)

               macrophage                                          helper T cell

only to HIV variants that use CCR5 for entry, whereas helper T cells are most effi-
ciently infected by variants that use CXCR4 (Figure 23–18). The viruses that are
found within the first few months after HIV infection almost invariably use CCR5,
which explains why individuals that carry an altered CCR5 gene are less suscep­
tible to HIV infection. In the later stages of infection, viruses often either switch to
use CXCR4 or adapt to use both co-receptors through the accumulation of viral
mutations. In this way, the virus can change the cell types it infects as the disease
progresses. It may seem paradoxical that viruses would infect immune cells, as we
might expect that virus binding would trigger an immune response; but invasion
of an immune cell can be a useful way for a virus to weaken the immune response
and travel around the body to infect other immune cells.

Viruses Enter Host Cells by Membrane Fusion, Pore Formation,
or Membrane Disruption

After recognition and attachment to the host-cell surface, viruses must enter into
the cell for viral replication to proceed. Entry into host cells requires that viruses
overcome different challenges that depend on virus size and structure (see
Figure 23–11). Enveloped viruses must regulate membrane fusion processes,
both to ensure that their membrane envelopes fuse only with the appropriate
host-cell membrane and to prevent fusion with one another. Such regulation is
achieved by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, for example, by requiring both binding
of the virus spike protein to the ACE2 receptor and cleaving of the spike protein by
a host-cell protease to enable fusion with the host-cell membrane.
  Some enveloped viruses, such as HIV, enter the host cell by fusing their enve-
lope membrane at neutral pH with the plasma membrane (Figure 23–19A). In this
scenario, binding to receptors or co-receptors usually triggers a conformational
change in a viral envelope protein that exposes a normally buried fusion peptide
(discussed in Chapter 13).
   Most enveloped (and nonenveloped) viruses enter cells by activating signal-
ing pathways in the cell that induce endocytosis, commonly via clathrin-coated
pits (see Figure 13–7), leading to internalization into endosomes. Large viruses
that do not fit into clathrin-coated vesicles, such as poxviruses, often enter cells
by macropinocytosis, a process by which membrane ruffles fold over and entrap
fluid into macropinosomes (see Figure 13–68).
  Once inside endosomes, enveloped viruses such as influenza A virus must fuse
their envelope with the endosomal membrane from the luminal side, and they
frequently sense the acid environment in the late endosome as a cue to trigger
a conformational change in a viral surface protein that exposes a fusion peptide
(Figure 23–19B and Movie 23.5). The mechanism of membrane fusion mediated
by viral spike glycoproteins has similarities with SNARE-mediated membrane
fusion during normal vesicular trafficking (discussed in Chapter 13). The H+
pumped into the early endosome also has another effect; it enters the influenza
virion through an ion channel in the viral envelope and triggers changes in the

=== Original PDF page 1370 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1331


                                                                                             Figure 23–19 Four virus entry strategies
       HIV              inﬂuenza virus                 poliovirus               adenovirus             that follow virus binding to virus
                                                                                                receptors. (A) Some enveloped viruses,
                                                                                       such as HIV, fuse directly with the host-cell
                                                                                       plasma membrane to release their RNA
                                                                             genome (blue) and capsid proteins (brown)
                                                                                                                  into the cytosol. (B) Other enveloped
          fusion                                                                                              viruses, such as influenza virus, first
                                  endocytosis                                                       bind to cell-surface receptors, triggering
                                                                                                 receptor-mediated endocytosis; when the
                                                                               endosome acidifies, the virus envelope
                                                                                                   fuses with the endosomal membrane,
                                                                                                           releasing the viral RNA genome (blue)
                                                                                   and capsid proteins (tan) into the cytosol.
                                                                                                                  (C) Poliovirus, a nonenveloped virus,
                                                                                        endocytosis      induces receptor-mediated endocytosis,
                                                             endocytosis                          and then forms a pore in the endosomal
                                                                              membrane to extrude its RNA genome
                                                                                                                    (blue) into the cytosol. (D) Adenovirus,
          uncoating                                                                              another nonenveloped virus, uses a more
                                                                                              complicated strategy: it induces receptor-
                                                                                          mediated endocytosis and then disrupts
                                                                                              early                                                                                                    the endosomal membrane, releasing the                                     acidiﬁcation,                                                                       endosome
                                     fusion,                                                          capsid including its DNA genome into the
                                uncoating                 uncoating,                                  cytosol. The trimmed-down virus eventually                                                        pore
                                                          formation                           docks onto a nuclear pore and releases
                                                                                                                                            its DNA (red) directly into the nucleus
                                                                                      where it is transcribed and replicated (see
                                                                                                                          lysis,           Movie 23.5).
                                                             DNA release





                                                           DNA enters
                                                                                     nucleus

 (A) fusion with          (B)   fusion with            (C)  pore formation        (D)   endosomal
 plasma membrane       membrane after                               membrane
                              endocytosis                                            disruption


viral capsid. These priming steps allow the capsids to disassemble once released
into the cytosol after virus fusion with the late endosomal membrane.
   Because they lack a surrounding lipid bilayer, nonenveloped viruses enter
host cells in a fundamentally different way. Poliovirus binds to a cell-surface
receptor, triggering both receptor-mediated endocytosis (see Figure 13–54) and a
conformational change in the viral particle. The conformational change exposes
a hydrophobic projection on one of the capsid proteins, which inserts into the
endosomal membrane to form a pore. The viral RNA genome then enters the
cytosol through the pore, leaving the capsid in the endosome (Figure 23–19C).
Adenovirus disrupts the endosomal membrane after it is taken up by receptor-
mediated endocytosis, releasing the remainder of the virus into the cytosol. During
endosomal trafficking and subsequent transport within the cytosol, adenoviruses
undergo multiple uncoating steps, which sequentially remove structural pro-
teins and ready the virus particles to release their DNA into the nucleus through
nuclear pore complexes (Figure 23–19D).

Bacteria Enter Host Cells by Phagocytosis

Bacteria are much larger than viruses—too large to be taken up either through
pores or by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Instead, they enter host cells by
phagocytosis, which is a normal function of phagocytes such as neutrophils, mac-
rophages, and dendritic cells (discussed in Chapter 24). These phagocytes patrol
the tissues of the body and ingest and destroy microbes; however, some intracel-
lular bacterial pathogens such as M. tuberculosis use this to their advantage and
have evolved to survive and multiply inside macrophages.

=== Original PDF page 1371 ===
1332   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


 (A)  ZIPPER MECHANISM                                (B) TRIGGER MECHANISM                        Figure 23–20 Mechanisms used by
                                                                                                bacteria to induce phagocytosis by host
                            invasin receptors                                   type III secretion           cells that are normally nonphagocytic.
        invasin              (integrins, cadherins)                                 apparatus                                                                                                                         (A) In the zipper mechanism, bacteria
                                                                                              express an invasion protein that binds with
                                                      BACTERIUM                       high affinity to a host-cell receptor, which
              BACTERIUM                                                                                                  is often a cell–cell or cell–matrix adhesion
                                                                                                               protein. (B) In the trigger mechanism,
                                                                                                        bacteria inject a set of effector molecules
                                                               actin                                                                                                                  into the host-cell cytosol through a type III
                                                    polymerization                                                                          injected proteins    actin                                                                                                        secretion system called SPI1 (Salmonella
                                                                                  polymerization
               activated receptors                                                                      pathogenicity island 1), inducing membrane
                                       actin                                                                  Rho                        ruffling. Both the zipper and trigger                              polymerization
                                                                   direct effect                          mechanisms cause the polymerization of                  Rho                                                  on actin                                                                    NPF                    actin at the site of bacterial attachment
                  NPF                                                                 by activating Rho family small GTPases
                                                                            Arp2/3              and the Arp2/3 complex. (C) A scanning
                    Arp2/3                                                                              electron micrograph showing Salmonella
 HOST CELL                                HOST CELL                                                                                                          enterica invasion by the trigger mechanism.
                                                                                                      Bacteria (pseudocolored yellow) are shown
                                                                                           surrounded by a small membrane ruffle.
                                                                                                                    (D) Fluorescence micrograph showing that
                                                                                                    the large ruffles that engulf the Salmonella
                                                                                                        bacteria are actin rich. The bacteria are
                                                                                                      labeled in green and actin filaments in red;
                                                                                      because of the color overlap, the bacteria
                                                                                         appear yellow. (C, from Rocky Mountain
                                                                                                        Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; D, from J.E.
                                                                                                 Galán, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 17:53–86,
                                                                                          2001. With permission from Annual
                                                                                                   Reviews.)



(C)                                                     (D)
                              4 µm                                             20 µm


  Some bacterial pathogens can invade host cells that are normally nonphago-
cytic. One way they do so is by expressing an invasion protein that binds with
high affinity to a host-cell receptor, which is often a cell–cell or cell–matrix adhe-
sion protein (discussed in Chapter 19). For example, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
(a bacterium that causes diarrhea and is a close relative of the plague bacte-
rium Y. pestis) expresses a protein called invasin that has an RGD motif that is
similar to fibronectin’s and which likewise is recognized by host-cell β1-integrins
(see Figure 19–48). Listeria monocytogenes, which causes a rare but serious
form of food poisoning, invades host cells by expressing a protein that binds
to the cell–cell adhesion protein E-cadherin (see Figures 19–4 and 19–5). For
both these bacterial species, binding of the bacterial invasion proteins to the
host-cell adhesion proteins stimulates signaling through members of the Rho
family of small GTPases (discussed in Chapter 16). This in turn activates NPFs
and the Arp2/3 complex, leading to actin polymerization at the site of bacterial
attachment. Actin polymerization, sometimes accompanied by the assembly
of a clathrin coat, drives the advancement of the host cell’s plasma membrane
over the adhesive surface of the microbe, resulting in the phagocytosis of the
bacterium—a process known as the zipper mechanism of invasion (Figure 23–20A).
  A second pathway by which bacteria can invade nonphagocytic cells is known
as the trigger mechanism (Figure 23–20B). It is used by various pathogens, includ-
ing the food-borne pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, and it is
initiated when the bacterium injects a set of effector molecules into the host-cell
cytosol through a type III secretion system (see Figure 23–7). Some of these effector
molecules activate Rho family proteins, which in turn stimulate actin polymer-
ization, as just discussed. Other bacterial effector proteins directly interact with
host-cell cytoskeletal elements, nucleating and stabilizing actin filaments and
causing the rearrangement of actin cross-linking proteins. The overall effect is to
cause the formation of ruffles on the surface of the host cell (Figure 23–20C and D),

=== Original PDF page 1372 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1333



(A)                                                                                                                         (B)
                                                                                                                  parasite in vacuole       host-cell nucleus





               host cell

                               INJECTION OF
                              EFFECTORS


  Toxoplasma
   gondii
             conoid



                             nucleus
   ATTACHMENT
                                                       moving junction
                                                                           (blue)                                                        14 µm
                                                                  INVASION
                                                                                             Figure 23–21 The life cycle of the
                                                                                                             intracellular parasite Toxoplasma
                                                                                                     gondii. (A) After attachment to a host cell,
                                                                                                                             T. gondii uses its conoid to inject effector    CELL LYSIS
   AND RELEASE                                                                                       proteins that facilitate invasion. These
    OF PARASITES                                                                                             effector proteins include a receptor that
                                                         REPLICATION IN                       binds a parasite surface protein, as well
                                                   VACUOLE                        as components of the moving junction
                                                                                       (shown in blue) through which the parasite
                                                                                        squeezes as it enters the host cell. As the
                                                                                                host cell’s plasma membrane invaginates,
                                                                                                    the parasite somehow removes the normal
                                                                                                               host-cell membrane proteins, so that the
                                                                                     compartment (shown in red) does not
                                                                                                    fuse with lysosomes. After several rounds
                                                                                                               of replication, the parasite causes the
which fold over and engulf the bacteria by a process that resembles macropinocy-    compartment to break down and the
tosis (see Figure 13–68). The appearance of cells being invaded by use of the trigger     host cell to lyse, releasing the progeny
mechanism is similar to the ruffling induced by some extracellular growth factors,     parasites to infect other host cells (see
suggesting that the bacteria hijack normal intracellular signaling pathways.            Movie 23.6). (B) Light micrograph of
                                                                                                                             T. gondii replicating within a membrane-
                                                                                             enclosed compartment (a parasitophorous
Intracellular Eukaryotic Parasites Actively Invade Host Cells                vacuole) in a cultured cell. (B, courtesy of
                                                                                      Manuel Camps and John Boothroyd.)
The uptake of viruses and bacteria into host cells is carried out largely by the host,
with the pathogen being a relatively passive participant. In contrast, intracellular
eukaryotic parasites, which are typically much larger than other types of intra-
cellular pathogens, invade host cells through a variety of complex pathways that
usually require energy expenditure by the parasite.
   Toxoplasma gondii, a cat parasite that also causes occasional serious human
infections in pregnant and immunocompromised individuals, is an example.
T. gondii invasion involves the secretion of parasite effector proteins that target
host-cell components, as well as the activities of the parasite’s own cytoskeleton
(Figure 23–21 and Movie 23.6). When this protozoan contacts a host cell, it pro-
trudes an unusual microtubule-based structure called a conoid, which facilitates
host-cell entry. At the point of contact, the parasite discharges effector proteins
into the host cell from specialized secretory organelles. One of these effector pro-
teins is a receptor that inserts into the host-cell plasma membrane and binds to a
parasite surface protein. Other effector proteins form a ring-like moving junction
through which the parasite squeezes using forces generated by its own unusual
actin and myosin cytoskeleton. Remarkably, as the parasite invades it removes
host transmembrane proteins from the surrounding membrane, so that it is
eventually protected in a membrane-enclosed compartment, or parasitophorous
vacuole, that does not fuse with lysosomes and does not participate in host-cell
membrane trafficking processes. The specialized membrane is selectively porous:
it allows the parasite to take up small metabolic intermediates and nutrients from

=== Original PDF page 1373 ===
1334   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


1. ATTACHMENT TO HOST        2. Ca2+ SIGNAL                3. FUSION OF LYSOSOMES        lysosome-independent
   CELL-SURFACE RECEPTORS      RECRUITS LYSOSOMES     WITH PLASMA MEMBRANE          pathway
                            lysosome-dependent pathway



                                    Ca2+  Ca2+

                                                                                   4. INVASION
  Trypanosoma                            compartment
                                                                                   early endosome   cruzi                                        derived from
                                               lysosomal
                              lysosomes      membrane
                                                                                          lysosomes




  HOST CYTOSOL

                                                                                                    REPLICATION



                                                                                    5. SECRETION OF      6. LYSIS OF SURROUNDING
                                                           PORE-FORMING     MEMBRANE, RELEASE OF
                                                              PROTEIN          PATHOGEN INTO CYTOSOL

the host cell’s cytosol but excludes macromolecules. Malaria parasites invade     Figure 23–22 The two alternative
human red blood cells using a similar mechanism.                                        strategies that Trypanosoma cruzi
                                                                                   uses to invade host cells. In the   The protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi, which causes Chagas disease in Mexico                                                                                         lysosome-dependent pathway (left),
and Central and South America, uses two alternative invasion strategies. In a      T. cruzi recruits host-cell lysosomes to
lysosome-dependent pathway, the parasite attaches to the host’s cell-surface       its site of attachment to the host cell.
receptors, inducing a local increase in Ca2+ in the host cell’s cytosol. The Ca2+ sig-    The lysosomes fuse with the invaginating
nal recruits lysosomes to the site of parasite attachment, and the lysosomes fuse    plasma membrane to create an intracellular
                                                                                     compartment constructed almost entirelywith the host cell’s plasma membrane, allowing the parasites rapid access to the                                                                                                               of lysosomal membrane. After a brief stay
lysosomal compartment (Figure 23–22). In a lysosome-independent pathway, the      in the compartment, the parasite secretes
parasite penetrates the host-cell plasma membrane by inducing the membrane to    a pore-forming protein that disrupts the
invaginate, without lysosome recruitment.                                                 surrounding membrane, thereby allowing
                                                                                                    the parasite to escape into the host-cell
                                                                                                       cytosol and proliferate. In the lysosome-
Some Intracellular Pathogens Escape from the Phagosome              independent pathway (right), the parasite
into the Cytosol                                                                         induces the host plasma membrane to
                                                                                                        invaginate and pinch off without recruiting
All intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and eukaryotic parasites,     lysosomes; then, lysosomes fuse with the
face a similar problem: they must find a compartment within the host cell where    endosome prior to the parasite’s escape
                                                                                                                  into the cytosol.
they can replicate themselves. After their endocytosis by a host cell, they usually
find themselves in an endosomal compartment, which normally would fuse with
lysosomes (see Figure 13–67)—a dangerous place for pathogens because of the
presence of many antimicrobial factors. To survive, pathogens use a variety of
strategies (Figure 23–23). Some escape from the endosomal compartment before
such fusion. Others remain in the endosomal compartment but modify it so that

                                     intracellular pathogen

                                                                        host cell                     Figure 23–23 Choices that an
                                                                                                             intracellular pathogen faces. After
                     endosome or                                                                                                          entry into a host cell, generally through                     phagosome
                                                                                              phagocytosis into a membrane-enclosed
                                               3                                                                fusion with lysosomes                  compartment, intracellular pathogens can                           1
                                                                                        use one of three strategies to survive and
                                                                                                                    replicate. Pathogens that escape into the                                     2
                                                                                                       cytosol (1) include all viruses, Trypanosoma
                                                                                                                       cruzi, Listeria monocytogenes, and Shigella
             ESCAPE                                                                                                  flexneri. Those that prevent fusion with
                                                   SURVIVE IN                             lysosomes (2) include Mycobacterium
                                              LYSOSOME                                    tuberculosis, Legionella pneumophila, and
                                                                                       Toxoplasma gondii. Those that survive                            PREVENT FUSION
                          WITH LYSOSOMES                                                                in the lysosome (3) include Salmonella
                                                                                                              enterica, Coxiella burnetii, and Leishmania.

=== Original PDF page 1374 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1335



                                                     E-cadherin
 1  Listeria attaches
    to E-cadherin                    epithelial host cell


          uptake by                                                             6  secreted listeriolysin now       2           zipper mechanism            4  listeriolysin-mediated                          destroyed in host proteasomes
                                   membrane disruption

    phagosome          3  listeriolysin
                                 secretion                      5  bacterial release
                                                        and replication                             proteasome
                                 pH <6.0                        pH >6.0


it no longer fuses with lysosomes. Still others have evolved to weather the harsh     Figure 23–24 Escape of Listeria
conditions in the lysosome.                                                     monocytogenes by selective destruction
                                                                                                   of the phagosomal membrane. The   Trypanosoma cruzi uses the escape strategy by secreting a pore-forming toxin                                                                                              bacterium attaches to E-cadherin or other
that lyses the lysosome membrane, releasing the parasite into the host cell’s     receptors on the surface of host epithelial
cytosol (see Figure 23–22). The bacterium Listeria monocytogenes uses a similar      cells and induces its own uptake by the
strategy. After phagocytosis by the zipper mechanism, it secretes a protein called     zipper mechanism (see Figure 23–20A).
listeriolysin O, which disrupts the phagosomal membrane, releasing the bacteria     Within the phagosome, the bacterium
                                                                                                   secretes the protein listeriolysin O, whichinto the cytosol (Figure 23–24).                                                                                                                                       is activated at pH <6 and forms oligomers
                                                                                                                             in the phagosome membrane, thereby
Many Pathogens Alter Membrane Traffic in the Host Cell                     creating large pores and eventually
                                                                                                          disrupting the membrane. Once in the
to Survive and Replicate                                                                        host-cell cytosol, the bacteria begin
                                                                                                          to replicate and continue to secrete
Intracellular pathogens that remain in membrane-bound compartments of the                                                                                                                                listeriolysin O; because the pH in the
host cell after invasion (see Figure 23–23) often alter these compartments to     cytosol is >6, however, the listeriolysin
reduce their exposure to antimicrobial molecules and allow for pathogen survival   O there is less active and is also rapidly
and reproduction. To do so, these pathogens must alter membrane (vesicular)    degraded by proteasomes. Thus, the host
traffic, for example by slowing or preventing normal fusing of endosomes with       cell’s plasma membrane remains intact.
lysosomes (Figure 23–25).
   Different pathogens have distinct strategies for altering host-cell membrane
traffic. M. tuberculosis prevents the maturation of the early endosome that contains
the bacteria, so the endosome never acidifies or acquires the other characteristics
of a late endosome or lysosome. Phagosomes containing Salmonella enterica,
in contrast, acidify and acquire markers of late endosomes and lysosomes, but
the bacteria slow the process of phagosomal maturation. They do so by injecting
effector proteins through a second type III secretion system, distinct from that


                                                                                Legionella
                                                                    pneumophila

                  Mycobacterium        Salmonella
                      tuberculosis            enterica
                                                                                             Figure 23–25 Modifications of
                                                                         membrane traffic in host cells by
                                                                                                     bacterial pathogens to slow or
                                                                                           prevent normal fusing of endosomes
                                    recycling                   recycling                                 with lysosomes. Intracellular bacterial
                                                                          ER            pathogens, including Mycobacterium
                  early                                                                           vesicles            tuberculosis, Salmonella enterica, and
           endosome                                                                                 Legionella pneumophila, all replicate in
                                                                                      membrane-enclosed compartments, but
                                                                                                    the compartments differ. M. tuberculosis
                                              late endosome                                            remains in a compartment that has early
       late
                                               TGN                              endosomal markers and continues to   endosome
                                                                                     communicate with the plasma membrane
                                                                                                                    via transport vesicles. S. enterica replicates
                                                                       Golgi                                in a compartment that has late endosomal
                                                                                                markers. L. pneumophila replicates in an
                        lysosome                                                               unusual compartment that is wrapped
                                                                                                                             in rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
                                                             ER                      membrane and communicates with the            normal endocytic
               pathway                                                      ER via transport vesicles. TGN = trans
                                                                                                     Golgi network.

=== Original PDF page 1375 ===
1336   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


         Salmonella                Salmonella-                                                    Figure 23–26 Salmonella enterica residing
                                  induced ﬁlament                                                       in a modified phagosomal compartment
                       Salmonella-                                                                   called the Salmonella-containing vacuole.
                       containing                                                            These bacteria invade the host cell using
                       vacuole                                                                                     one of two type III secretion systems to
                                                                                                                            inject effector proteins that induce the trigger
                     SPI2                                                                mechanism of microbe entry illustrated in
        SPI1                                                                                              Figure 23–20B. (A) After its engulfment into
                                    microtubules                                              a phagosome, the bacterium inactivates the
                                                                                                                                                      first type III secretion system and activates
                                                                                                      the second type III secretion system to
        nucleus                      kinesin                                                                         inject different effector proteins, which
                                                                                            remodel the phagosome into the specialized
                                                                                                      Salmonella-containing vacuole. One of the
                                                                                                               injected effector proteins activates host
                           Golgi                                                                            kinesin motor proteins to pull membrane
                                                                                                       tubules outward toward the plus ends of the
  (A)                                                             (B)
                                                                                10 µm        microtubules (see Figure 16–53), forming a
                                                                                                             structure with an unusual tubulated shape
                                                                                                                that is of unknown functional significance.
                                                                                                                        (B) Fluorescence micrograph showing
involved in invasion by the trigger mechanism (see Figure 23–20). Some of these     S. enterica in a Salmonella-containing
bacterial effectors activate host kinesin motor proteins to pull membrane tubules     vacuole. The bacteria are stained green,
outward from the phagosome along cytoplasmic microtubules, forming a special-     the microtubules red, and the nucleus blue.
                                                                                                                    (B, courtesy of Stephane Meresse.)
ized compartment called the Salmonella-containing vacuole (Figure 23–26).
   Other bacteria seem to find shelter in intracellular compartments that are
distinct from those of the usual endocytic system. One example is Legionella pneu-     Figure 23–27 Legionella pneumophila
mophila, which was first recognized as a human pathogen in 1976, when it was     residing in a compartment with
found to be the cause of a type of pneumonia known as Legionnaires’ disease. L.     characteristics similar to those of the
pneumophila is normally a parasite of freshwater amoebae but can be spread to    rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER).                                                                                                                            (A) Electron micrograph showing the
humans by central air-conditioning systems, which harbor infected amoebae and     unusual coiled structure that the Legionella
produce microdroplets of water that are easily inhaled. Once in the lung, the bacte-     pneumophila bacterium induces on the
ria are engulfed by macrophages by an unusual process called coiling phagocytosis     surface of a phagocyte during the invasion
(Figure 23–27A). L. pneumophila uses a type IV secretion system to inject effector     process. Some other pathogens, including the
                                                                                                   bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi (which causesproteins into the phagocyte that modulate the accumulation of phosphoinositides                                                                              Lyme disease), the eukaryotic pathogen
and the activity of proteins that regulate vesicular traffic, including SNARE pro-     Leishmania, and the yeast Candida albicans,
teins and Rab and Arf family small GTPases (discussed in Chapter 13). The effector    can also invade cells using this type of coiling
proteins thereby prevent the phagosome from fusing with endosomes and pro-     phagocytosis. (B) After invasion, L. pneumophila
mote its fusion with the endoplasmic reticulum, converting the phagosome into a    uses its type IV secretion system to secrete
                                                                                                                effector proteins that block phagosome–
compartment that resembles the rough endoplasmic reticulum (Figure 23–27B).                                                                                  endosome fusion and phagosome maturation.
   Viruses can also alter membrane traffic in the host cell. Many enveloped         It also secretes effector proteins that promote
viruses, including the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, make use of host-cell membranes     phosphoinositide conversion from PI(3)P to
to acquire their own envelope membrane. In the simplest cases, virally encoded     PI(4)P and the fusion of the phagosome with
glycoproteins are inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and follow     ER-derived vesicles, thereby converting the
                                                                                                                characteristics of the Legionella-containing
                                                                                                  vacuole from those of an endosome to those
   human                     Legionella                                                                    of the rough ER. See Figures 13–10 and
    phagocyte                  bacteria
                                                       Legionella                                13–11 for a discussion of phosphoinositides
                                                                     blocking of                   and membrane targeting. (A, from M.A.
                                                         endosome fusion   phagosome    Horwitz, Cell 36:27–33, 1984. With
                                                                                                   permission from Elsevier.)



                                                                                   type IV
                                                                                      secretion system

                                                                      ER vesicles
                                                          nucleus                                   PI(3)P

                                                                                                              PI(4)P



                                                 Legionella-                                fusion with
                                              containing vacuole        ribosomes     ER tubules
(A)                                                  (B)
                                   0.5 µm

=== Original PDF page 1376 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1337


the secretory pathway through the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane; the
viral capsid proteins and genome assemble into nucleocapsids, which acquire
their envelope as they bud off from the plasma membrane (see Figure 23–12).
The process for SARS-CoV-2 is more complicated, as this virus induces the for-
mation of convoluted double-membrane vesicles derived from the endoplasmic
reticulum, which house its genome replication factories (Figure 23–28A). These




         viral genome replication and transcription in                   exocytic
   double-membrane vesicles and surrounding cytosol                 vesicle





      ER                                                  ERGIC

                                                                     single-strand
                                                                                viral RNA
                                                  genome
                                                                                              Figure 23–28 Complex strategies for
                                                                                                                      viral envelope acquisition. (A) The
                                                                                                    coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 replicates its
          sub-genomic RNA                                          EXTRACELLULAR          positive sense RNA genome in double
          encoding viral proteins        spike proteins      CYTOSOL            SPACE           membrane vesicles associated with the
                                                                                          endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Viral genomes
(A)  SARS-CoV-2                                                                                      are released into the cytoplasm by a
                                                                                                      poorly understood mechanism that may
                                                                                                             involve passage through pores in the
                                                          intracellular enveloped                            double membrane. Transcription of sub-
                             Golgi                  virion (3 membranes)                            genomic RNAs encoding viral structural
                                                                                                         proteins occurs in the surrounding cytosol.
                                                                                                            Translation of transmembrane viral proteins,
                                                                                                          including the spike protein, occurs on the                                WRAPPING
                                                                                        ER. These proteins are then trafficked
                                                       FUSION                             from the ER to the ER Golgi intermediate
                                                  WITH                            compartment (ERGIC), where the single-
                                                 PLASMA                            stranded viral RNA genome associates
                                             MEMBRANE                                                                                                       with viral proteins to drive formation of virus                                                                                            extracellular
                                                                           enveloped             particles in the lumen of exocytic vesicles.
                                                                                            virion           When these vesicles fuse with the plasma                   immature virion                                                        intracellular mature                 (2 membranes)      membrane, viruses are released from the                        (1 membrane)
                                                      virion (1 membrane)                                             cell surface. (B) Vaccinia virus assembles
                                                                   EXTRACELLULAR        in “replication factories” in the cytosol, far
                                                  CYTOSOL            SPACE         away from the plasma membrane. The
                                                                                          immature virion, surrounded by a single
 (B)  Vaccinia virus                                                                    membrane, then acquires two additional
                                                                               membranes from the Golgi apparatus by a
                                                                                                      poorly understood wrapping mechanism,
                                                                                                          to form the intracellular enveloped virion.
                    outer membrane of nuclear envelope                                                    After fusion of the outermost membrane
                                                                                                       with the host-cell plasma membrane, the
                                                                                                                   extracellular enveloped virion is released
                                                                                             from the host cell. (C) Herpesvirus
                                                                                               nucleocapsids assemble in the nucleus
                                                                                   and then bud through the inner nuclear
                                                                              membrane into the space between the   nucleocapsid
                                                                                                            inner and outer nuclear membranes,
                                                                                                       acquiring a membrane coat. The virus
                                                                                                                 particles then apparently lose this coat
                                                 trans-Golgi-      plasma                                                                             when they fuse with the endoplasmic  NUCLEUS                              network       membrane
                                                    vesicle or                                                  reticulum membrane to escape into the
                                     endosome                                                   cytosol. Subsequently, the nucleocapsids
                               viral DNA                                                                                travel through the Golgi apparatus,
                                                                                                       acquiring two new membrane coats in the
                                                               EXTRACELLULAR
             inner membrane of                     CYTOSOL            SPACE                process. The virus then buds from the
              nuclear envelope                                                                                          cell surface with a single membrane
                                                                             when its outer membrane fuses with the
 (C)  Herpesvirus                                                                         plasma membrane.

=== Original PDF page 1377 ===
1338   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


may concentrate replication intermediates and sequester such intermediates
from innate immune sensor molecules (see Chapter 24). Viral genomes are then
released into the cytoplasm by an unknown mechanism and interact with viral
structural proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum Golgi intermediate compart-
ment (ERGIC), acquiring two new lipid bilayer membrane coats. Subsequent
fusion of virus-containing exocytic vesicles with the plasma membrane leads to
the release of viruses with a single membrane envelope. DNA viruses such as her-
pesviruses and vaccinia virus also alter membrane traffic and acquire their lipid
envelopes in complex ways (Figure 23–28B and C).

Bacteria and Viruses Use the Host-Cell Cytoskeleton
for Intracellular Movement

As mentioned earlier, many pathogens escape into the cytosol rather than
remaining in a membrane-enclosed compartment. The cytosol of mammalian
cells is extremely viscous, as it is crowded with protein complexes, organelles,
and cytoskeletal filaments, all of which inhibit the diffusion of particles the size
of a bacterium or a viral nucleocapsid. Thus, to reach a particular region of the
host cell, a pathogen must be actively moved there. As with transport of intra-
cellular organelles, pathogens generally use the host cell’s cytoskeleton for their
active movement.
   Several pathogens have adopted a remarkable mechanism that depends on actin
polymerization for their movement. These include the human bacterial pathogens
Listeria monocytogenes, Shigella flexneri, Rickettsia rickettsii (which causes Rocky
Mountain spotted fever), and Burkholderia pseudomallei (which causes melioi­
dosis, a disease characterized by severe respiratory symptoms), as well as Ebola
virus and the insect virus baculovirus. All induce the nucleation and assembly of
host-cell actin filaments at one pole of the microbe. The growing filaments gener-
ate force and push the pathogens through the cytosol at rates of up to 1 µm/min
(Figure 23–29). New filaments form at the rear of each pathogen and are left behind
like a rocket trail as the microbe advances; the filaments depolymerize within a
minute or so as they encounter depolymerizing factors in the cytosol. For L. mono-                                                                                                                    free bacterium
cytogenes and S. flexneri, the moving bacteria collide with the plasma membrane
and move outward, inducing the formation of long, thin, host-cell protrusions with
the bacteria at their tip. A neighboring cell often engulfs these projections, allowing                              host cell
the bacteria to enter the neighbor’s cytoplasm without exposure to the extracel-
                                                                                                               phagocytosis
lular environment, thereby avoiding antibodies produced by the host’s adaptive             by zipper
immune system. For B. pseudomallei, movement and collision of the bacteria with            mechanism
the plasma membrane promote cell–cell fusion, which serves a similar purpose of
                                                                                                                                           bacterial
immune avoidance while aiding continued bacterial replication.                                                escape from
   The molecular mechanisms of pathogen-induced actin assembly differ for the                       phagosome
different pathogens, suggesting that they evolved independently (Figure 23–30).                                                                                                                            actin
L. monocytogenes and baculovirus produce proteins that directly bind to and acti-               nucleation
vate the Arp2/3 complex to initiate the formation of an actin tail and movement
                                                                                                                   actin tail assembly
(see Figure 16–17). S. flexneri produces an unrelated surface protein that binds to
and activates the NPF N-WASp, which then activates the Arp2/3 complex. Rick-
ettsia and Burkholderia species produce proteins that directly polymerize actin,                  motile
                                                                                                                          bacteria
for example by mimicking the function of host proteins such as formins (see
Figure 16–13).
  Many viral pathogens rely primarily on microtubule-dependent motor pro-
teins, rather than actin polymerization, to move within the host-cell cytosol,
                                                                                                                                                                           cell
                                                                                                                                         fusion
Figure 23–29 The actin-based movement of bacterial pathogens within and between host                         protrusion formation
cells. After invasion, bacterial pathogens such as L. monocytogenes, S. flexneri, R. rickettsii, and B.
pseudomallei induce the assembly of actin-rich tails in the host-cell cytoplasm, which drives rapid
bacterial movement. For most of these pathogens, the moving bacteria collide with the host-cell
plasma membrane to form membrane-covered protrusions, which are engulfed by neighboring
cells—spreading the infection from cell to cell. In contrast, for B. pseudomallei, collision with the            engulfment by
plasma membrane promotes cell–cell fusion, creating a conduit through which bacteria can invade          neighboring host cell
neighboring cells (Movie 23.7).

=== Original PDF page 1378 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1339


         Listeria monocytogenes              Shigella ﬂexneri                   Rickettsia rickettsii           Figure 23–30 Molecular mechanisms
                                                                                                           for actin nucleation by various bacterial
                                                                                       pathogens. L. monocytogenes and
                                               two                                        S. flexneri induce actin nucleation by
                                                membranes                                      recruiting and activating the host Arp2/3
                                                                          cell wall                                complex (see Figure 16–12), although
                                                                                      each uses a different recruitment strategy:
                                                                                                               L. monocytogenes expresses a surface
                                                                                                               protein, ActA, that directly binds to
                                                                                   and activates the Arp2/3 complex; S.                                           IcsA
       ActA                                                                                                           flexneri expresses a surface protein, IcsA
                                 WIP                       formin-like                            (unrelated to ActA), that recruits the host
                            N-WASp                      protein (Sca2)                 NPF N-WASp, which in turn recruits the
                                                                                           Arp2/3 complex, along with other host                    Arp2/3                        Arp2/3
                  complex                     complex                                              proteins, including WIP (WASp-interacting
                                                                                                                    protein). R. rickettsii uses an entirely
           actin                             actin
                                                                                 actin                            different strategy: it expresses a surface
                                                                                                               protein, Sca2, that directly nucleates actin
                                                                                                      polymerization by mimicking the activity of
                                                                                                host formin proteins.

taking advantage of the inherent polarity of microtubules to enable directed long-
range movements. Important examples are viruses that infect neurons, such as
the neurotropic alphaherpesviruses, which include the virus that causes chicken-
pox (Figure 23–31). These virions enter sensory neurons at the tips of their axons
and move by retrograde (“backward”) axonal transport along the axon toward
the microtubule minus end. The transport is mediated by attachment of viral
capsid proteins to the motor protein dynein. These viruses then establish either
productive or latent infection in the nuclei of neurons of the peripheral nervous
system. After replication or reactivation, virions are then carried by anterograde
(“forward”) axonal transport along microtubules to the axon tips, with the trans-
port being mediated by the attachment of a different viral capsid protein to a
kinesin motor protein. Many other viruses associate with either dynein or kine-
sin motor proteins to move along microtubules at some stage in their replication,
and some even alter the dynamic assembly and disassembly of microtubules. As
microtubules serve as oriented tracks for vesicular transport in all cell types, not
just neurons, it is not surprising that many viruses have independently evolved
the ability to exploit them for their own transport.


                                              latent reservoir of
                                             herpesvirus

          herpesvirus enters
         from epithelial cell
                                      nucleus
                                                                                              cell body of
                      dynein-mediated                                   peripheral nerve
                       retrograde transport

                            axon
                                                                              microtubule
epithelial
cell                                                                                                     rare spread to CNS,
                                                                                                               lethal encephalitis
                                                      reactivated,
                                                     replicated virus
                          kinesin-mediated
                         anterograde transport
                                                                       dendrite

       virus causes
       local infection
     and spread

Figure 23-31 Microtubule-based movement of viruses. Neurotropic alphaherpesviruses infect peripheral nerve cells from
neighboring epithelial cells in the skin. Virus particles are then transported along microtubules in the nerve-cell axon toward
the microtubule minus ends in the cell body (retrograde transport), a process that is driven by dynein motor proteins. Upon
reaching the cell body, viruses can establish a latent reservoir in the nucleus. After reactivation (for example, following stress
or immune suppression) or upon replication, virus particles are again transported along microtubules in the axon, this time
toward the microtubule plus ends at the nerve terminal (anterograde transport), where they are released to enable local
reinfection and spread. In rare instances, viruses can instead spread to the central nervous system (CNS), which can cause
encephalitis.

=== Original PDF page 1379 ===
1340   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


                                              microbe                                          Figure 23–32 Microbial manipulation
              plasma membrane                                                                    of autophagy. Microbial pathogens
                                                                                        have various mechanisms for avoiding                                                         phagocytosis
                                                                                                             antimicrobial autophagy (red lines), which                                                                       RELEASE
                                                                                                       include modifying their surface to avoid
                                                                                         autophagy initiation or secreting factors
                            escape                                                      and initiating actin-based motility to avoid         actin-based
           motility                                                                                 enclosure in autophagosomes. Microbes
                                                                                      can also exploit autophagy (green arrows),
                                                                               fusion with                   for example by recruiting and fusing with
                                                               autophagosome           autophagosomes to gain nutrients and
           surface modiﬁcation
                                                                                                                            lipids or by growing near autolysosomes
                                                     secreted
                                                          factors               growth near                  for nutrient acquisition.
                                                                       autolysosome




                                                                                  nutrients


                                      mitochondrion
                                                                      autolysosome
               autophagy

                                                  endosome


                      INHIBIT AUTOPHAGY                      EXPLOIT AUTOPHAGY


Many Microbes Manipulate Autophagy

Whether a microbe lives within the cytosol or inside a membrane-bound compart-
ment, it must contend with the host cell’s defenses, which include the autophagy
pathway (see Figure 13–67). Autophagy is the process through which organelles or
other cytoplasmic cargoes become surrounded by a double-membrane autopha-
gosome that fuses with lysosomes to promote degradation (see Figure 13–71). It
has recently become apparent that targeting of intracellular microbes for destruc-
tion by autophagy is an important pathway in the innate immune defense against
infection (see Chapter 24). When this occurs, the process is called antimicrobial
autophagy, or xenophagy. Not surprisingly, pathogens have evolved various
strategies either to avoid antimicrobial autophagy or to manipulate autophagy
pathways for their own benefit (Figure 23–32).
  One strategy for avoiding antimicrobial autophagy is to deploy a protective
shield that prevents detection of the microbe by the host cell. Francisella tula-
rensis, which causes the zoonosis tularemia, or rabbit fever, uses this scheme.
Once it escapes from the phagosome into the cytosol, it shields its surface by
producing a variant of its outer membrane LPS that is not recognized by the host
cell’s autophagy initiation machinery. Other strategies to subvert autophagy,
employed by L. monocytogenes, are to secrete bacterial enzymes and harness
actin-based movement, both of which enable bacteria to avoid enclosure by
autophagosomes. On the other hand, some pathogens take the opposite strategy
of activating and then exploiting autophagy. Coxiella burnetii, which causes the
zoonosis Q fever, replicates in a membrane-bound compartment that recruits and
fuses with autophagosomes to deliver nutrients as well as lipids for compartment
expansion. Poliovirus makes use of autophagy for the alternative effect of pro-
moting virus trafficking to the plasma membrane and release from the host cell.

Viruses Can Take Over the Metabolism of the Host Cell

Viruses use basic host-cell machinery for most aspects of their reproduction:
they depend on host-cell ribosomes to produce their proteins, and many use
host-cell DNA and RNA polymerases for their own replication and transcription.
Many viruses encode proteins that modify the host transcription or translation
apparatus to favor the synthesis of viral RNAs and proteins over those of the host

=== Original PDF page 1380 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1341


cell, shifting the synthetic capacity of the cell toward the production of new virus
particles. Poliovirus, for example, encodes a protease that specifically cleaves the
TATA-binding component of TFIID (see Figure 6–15), shutting off transcription of
most of the host cell’s protein-coding genes. Influenza virus produces a protein
that blocks both the splicing and the polyadenylation of host-cell RNA transcripts,
preventing their export into the cytosol (see Figure 6–39), but does not affect viral
RNA transcripts.
   Viruses also alter translation by the host. Translation initiation for most host-
cell mRNAs depends on recognition of their 5′ cap by translation initiation factors
(see Figure 6–40). This initiation process is often inhibited during viral infection,
so that the host-cell ribosomes can be used more efficiently for the synthesis
of viral proteins. Some viral genomes encode endonucleases that cleave off the
5′ cap from host-cell mRNAs; some go even further by using the liberated 5′ caps
as primers to synthesize viral mRNAs, a process called cap snatching. Several
other viral RNA genomes encode proteases that cleave certain translation initia­
tion factors; these viruses rely on 5′ cap–independent translation of their own
RNA, using internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs; see Figure 7–72).
  DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus use host-cell DNA polymerase to
replicate their genome. Because DNA polymerase is expressed at high levels only
during S phase of the cell cycle, adenovirus has evolved a mechanism to drive
the host cell into S phase, so that the cell produces large amounts of active DNA
polymerase, which then replicates the viral genome. To accomplish this, the ade-
novirus genome also encodes proteins that inactivate both Rb (see Figure 17–59)
and p53 (see Figure 17–60), two key suppressors of cell-cycle progression. As might
be expected for any mechanism that encourages unregulated DNA replication,
these viruses can promote, under some circumstances, the development of cancer.
   Animal RNA viruses encode their own replication proteins because most
animals lack polymerase enzymes that use RNA as a template (such as the
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases used in RNA interference; see Chapter 7). For
RNA viruses with a single-stranded genome, the replication strategy depends on
whether the RNA is a positive [+] strand, which contains translatable information
like mRNA does, or a complementary negative [–] strand. When the RNA genome
is a positive [+] strand (such as for the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2), the incoming
viral genome is translated to produce the viral RNA polymerase and viral pro-
teins; the viral polymerase is then used to replicate the viral RNA and to generate
mRNAs for the production of more viral proteins. For viruses with a negative [–]
strand RNA genome (such as influenza and measles virus), an RNA polymerase
enzyme is packaged as a structural protein of the incoming viral capsids.
   Retroviruses such as HIV, which have a positive [+] strand RNA genome, are a
special class of RNA virus because they carry with them a viral reverse transcrip-
tase enzyme. After entry to the host cell, the reverse transcriptase uses the viral
RNA genome as a template to synthesize a double-stranded DNA copy of the viral
genome, which enters into the nucleus and integrates into the host cell’s chromo-
somes (see Figure 5–61). It is later transcribed by the cell’s DNA-dependent RNA
polymerase to produce viral genomes and proteins.

Pathogens Can Evolve Rapidly by Antigenic Variation

The complexity and specificity of the interplay between pathogens and their
host cells might suggest that virulence would be difficult to acquire by random
mutation. Yet, new pathogens are constantly emerging, and old pathogens are
constantly changing in ways that make familiar infections more difficult to pre-
vent or treat. Pathogens have two advantages that enable them to evolve rapidly.
First, they replicate very quickly, providing a great deal of mutational variation for
natural selection to work with. Whereas humans and chimpanzees have acquired
a 2% difference in genome sequences over about 8 million years of divergent
evolution, poliovirus manages a 2% change in its genome in 5 days—about the
time it takes the virus to pass from the human mouth to the gut. Second, selec-
tive pressures act rapidly on this genetic variation. The host’s adaptive immune

=== Original PDF page 1381 ===
1342   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection



(A)                                                                                   (B)
            inactive Vsg genes                        expression
   a          f      b              c                        site
                               )          anti-VSGa    anti-VSGb    anti-VSGc )

                               ,


                               ,                   (                                    ×1000      VSGa
            gene b copied to                  (
               expression site                                             VSGa                  VSGc
                                                                               VSGb                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      parasites                                                                                                                                                                                                 antibodies
                                                              of                                       of
                                                                                                                                                                                         number                                                                                                                    levels
                                    ×1000      VSGb
            gene c copied to                                                                           time (weeks)
               expression site
                                                                                  infection
                                                                                             Figure 23-33 Antigenic variation in
                                                                                     trypanosomes. (A) There are about
                                                                                 1000 distinct Vsg genes in Trypanosoma
                                                                                                            brucei, and they are expressed one at a
                                                                                                  time from approximately 20 expression
                                                                                                                   sites in the genome. To be expressed, an                                    ×1000       VSGc
                                                                                                                inactive gene is copied and the copy is
                                                                            moved into an expression site through DNA
                                                                                                   recombination. Each Vsg gene encodes a
system and modern microbicidal drugs, both of which destroy pathogens that fail                                                                                                                      different surface protein (antigen). These
to change, are the main sources of these selective pressures.                              switching events allow the trypanosome
  An example of an adaptation to the selective pressure imposed by the adaptive     to repeatedly change the surface antigen
immune system is the phenomenon of antigenic variation. An important adaptive         it expresses. (B) A person infected with
                                                                                        trypanosomes expressing VSGa mounts animmune response against many pathogens is the host’s production of antibodies
                                                                                                 antibody response against this particular
that recognize specific molecules (antigens) on the pathogen’s surface (discussed                                                                                                         antigen, which clears most of the VSGa-
in Chapter 24). Many pathogens have evolved mechanisms that change these anti-     expressing parasites. However, a few of
gens during the course of an infection, enabling them to stay one step ahead of the     the trypanosomes will have spontaneously
antibody response. Some eukaryotic parasites, for example, undergo programmed     switched to expression of VSGb, which can
                                                                          now proliferate until anti-VSGb antibodiesrearrangements of the genes encoding their surface antigens (Figure 23–33). A                                                                                                     are made. By that time, however, some
striking example occurs in Trypanosoma brucei, a protozoan parasite that causes     parasites will have switched to VSGc, and
African sleeping sickness and is spread by tsetse flies. (T. brucei is a relative of    so the cycle continues.
T. cruzi—see Figure 23–22—but it replicates extracellularly rather than intracellu-
larly.) T. brucei is covered with a single type of glycoprotein, called variant-specific
glycoprotein (VSG), which elicits in the host an antibody response that rapidly
clears most of the parasites. The trypanosome genome, however, contains about
1000 different inactive Vsg genes (or pseudogenes), each encoding a VSG with a
distinct amino acid sequence. Only one Vsg gene is expressed at any one time,
from one of approximately 20 possible expression sites in the genome. Gene rear-
rangements that copy different inactive Vsg genes into expression sites repeatedly
change the VSG protein displayed on the surface of the pathogen. In this way, a
few trypanosomes with an altered VSG escape the initial antibody-mediated clear-
ance, replicate, and cause the disease to recur, leading to a chronic cyclic infection.
   Bacterial pathogens can also rapidly change their surface antigens. Species of
the genus Neisseria are champions at this. These Gram-negative cocci can cause
sexually transmitted disease, in the case of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, or meningitis,
in the case of Neisseria meningitidis. They undergo genetic recombination very
similar to that just described for eukaryotic pathogens, which enables them to
vary the pilin protein they use to attach to host cells. By inserting one of the mul-
tiple silent copies of variant pilin genes into a single expression locus, they can
express many slightly different versions of the protein and repeatedly change the
amino acid sequence over time. Neisseria bacteria are also extremely adept at tak-
ing up DNA from their environment by natural transformation and incorporating
it into their genomes, further contributing to their extraordinary variability. The
end result of this considerable variation is a plethora of different surface protein
compositions with which to bewilder the host adaptive immune system. It is
therefore not surprising that it has been difficult to develop an effective vaccine
against N. gonorrhoeae infections, although there are now several that protect

=== Original PDF page 1382 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1343


against N. meningitidis, due to the much smaller number of variants of its surface
polysaccharide capsule.

Error-prone Replication Dominates Viral Evolution

In contrast to the DNA rearrangements in bacteria and parasites, viruses rely on an
error-prone replication mechanism for antigenic variation. Retroviral genomes,
for example, acquire on average one point mutation every replication cycle,
because the viral reverse transcriptase (see Figure 5–61) needed to produce DNA
from the viral RNA genome lacks the proofreading activity of DNA polymerases. A
typical, untreated HIV infection may eventually produce HIV genomes with every
possible point mutation. By a process of mutation and selection within each host,
most HIV viruses change over time—from a form that is most efficient at infecting
macrophages to one more efficient at infecting T cells, as described earlier (see
Figure 23–18). Similarly, once a patient is treated with an antiviral drug, the viral
genome can quickly mutate and be selected for its resistance to the drug. Remark-
ably, only about one-third of the nucleotide positions in the coding sequence of
the viral genome are invariant (because mutations at these positions would be
detrimental to the virus), and nucleotide sequences in some parts of the genome,
such as the Env gene (see Figure 7–66), can differ by as much as 30% from one
HIV isolate to another. This extraordinary genomic plasticity greatly complicates
attempts to develop vaccines against HIV.
   The rapid evolution of HIV by error-prone replication has also led to the swift
emergence and spread of new HIV strains. Nucleotide sequence comparisons
between various strains of HIV and the very similar simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV) isolated from a variety of monkey species suggest that the most
virulent type of HIV, HIV-1, may have jumped from primates to humans multi-
ple independent times, starting as long ago as 1908 (Figure 23–34A). Sequence


  (A)                                                 (B)

                  human HIV-1 M
                  human HIV-1 M
                     chimpanzee SIV
                     chimpanzee SIV
                  human HIV-1 N                                                                    EUROPE
                  human HIV-1 N                                                                             ~1980                                      SAN FRANCISCO
                     chimpanzee SIV              ~1976            NEW YORK
                     chimpanzee SIV                                      ~1971
                     chimpanzee SIV
                                              GEORGIA                     chimpanzee SIV
                                                     ~1975
                     chimpanzee SIV
                     chimpanzee SIV
                     chimpanzee SIV
                  human HIV-1 O
                  human HIV-1 O                                  HAITI
                                                              ~1963–1966                                           AFRICA                  new HIV strain
                           gorilla SIV
                           gorilla SIV
                     chimpanzee SIV
                     chimpanzee SIV
                      red-capped                                                                  KINSHASA
                   mangabey SIV                                                                          1920s–1960s
                                drill SIV
                        vervet monkey SIV
                        Tantalus monkey SIV
                        sooty mangabey SIV
                  human HIV-2 A
                  human HIV-2 B
                                          Figure 23–34 Diversification of HIV-1, HIV-2, and related strains of SIV. (A) HIV comprises                        sooty mangabey SIV
                                                      different viral families, all descended from SIV (simian immunodeficiency virus). On three separate                         Sykes’ monkey SIV
                                            occasions, SIV was passed from a chimpanzee to a human, resulting in three HIV-1 groups: major                        greater spot-nosed
                                                   (M), outlier (O), and non-M non-O (N). HIV-1 M is the most common and is primarily responsible for                   monkey SIV
                  De Brazza’s monkey    the global AIDS epidemic. On two separate occasions, SIV was passed from a sooty mangabey
                        SIV                monkey to a human, resulting in the two pandemic HIV-2 groups A and B. In 2009, a new strain
                                                  of HIV was discovered that appears to have resulted from SIV passage from a gorilla to a human.
   = jumps from monkey and ape to human     (B) Geography and timing of HIV-1 spread from Africa to other parts of the world.

=== Original PDF page 1383 ===
1344   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection



                          H2N2           H3N?


                       3 genes transferred  2 genes transferred
     H1N1
                     1918             1957            1968                                 2009                                                                                                           North American bird
                     (Spanish ﬂu)         (Asian ﬂu)     (Hong Kong ﬂu)                          pandemic


              possibly
                all 8 genes                                                                                      2 genes transferred
            transferred
                                                                   H3N2                           pig
                                                       human

                                                        HUMAN
    H1N1           H1N1           H2N2          H3N2                   FLU         H1N1                                                                                                         5 genes transferred                                                                            INFECTIONS
    bird ﬂu         human          human         human               TODAY
      virus

                                                                   H1N1
                               1950
                                    (lab strain)                        H1N1                       Figure 23–35 Model for the evolution
                                                                                                   of pandemic strains of influenza virus
                                                                  1977                    by recombination. Influenza A virus is
                                                                          (Russian ﬂu)                   a natural pathogen of birds, particularly
                                                                                                      waterfowl, and it is always present in wild
                                                                                                               bird populations. In 1918, a particularly
comparisons between human HIV strains has further enabled a reconstruction of      virulent form of the virus crossed the
                                                                                                species barrier from birds to humans and
the evolutionary and geographic history of the current pandemic of HIV-1 group                                                                                      caused a devastating worldwide epidemic.
M (major). The pandemic strain is thought to have originated in Kinshasa, Demo-     This strain was designated H1N1, referring
cratic Republic of the Congo, in the 1920s. Virus spread increased in Africa in the     to the specific forms of its main antigens,
1960s due to changing sexual behaviors and emerging transportation networks     hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N).
(Figure 23–34B). It then crossed the Atlantic to Haiti in the late 1960s and spread    Changes in the virus, rendering it less
                                                                                                                          virulent, and the rise of adaptive immunity
to New York and other locations in the United States in the 1970s, eventually                                                                                                                             in the human population prevented the
giving rise to a worldwide pandemic.                                                pandemic from continuing in subsequent
  An important exception to the rule that error-prone replication dominates viral     seasons, although H1N1 influenza strains
evolution is the influenza viruses. Although they accumulate point mutations as     continued to cause serious disease every
                                                                                                   year in very young and very old people.they replicate, they differ from other viruses in that their genome consists of several
                                                                                                                       In 1957, a new pandemic arose when
(usually eight) strands of RNA, each of which codes for different proteins. When     three genes were replaced by equivalent
two strains of influenza infect the same host, the RNA strands of the two strains    genes from a different avian virus (green
can reassort to form a new type of influenza virus. In normal years, influenza is a      bars); the new strain (designated H2N2)
mild disease in healthy adults, although it can be life-threatening in the very young    was not effectively cleared by antibodies
                                                                                                                             in people who had previously contractedand very old. Different influenza strains infect fowl such as ducks and chickens,                                                                                                       only H1N1 forms of influenza. In 1968,
but only a subset of these strains can infect humans, and transmission from fowl to     another pandemic was triggered when
humans is rare. In 1918, however, a particularly virulent variant of avian influenza    two genes were replaced from yet another
crossed the species barrier to infect humans, triggering the catastrophic pandemic     avian virus; the new virus was designated
of 1918 called the Spanish flu, which killed 20–50 million people worldwide. Sub-    H3N2. In 1977, there was a resurgence
                                                                                                               of H1N1 influenza, which had previously
sequent influenza pandemics have been triggered by genome reassortment, in                                                                                    been almost completely replaced by the
which a new RNA segment from an avian form of the virus replaced one or more of    N2 strains. Molecular sequence information
the viral RNA segments from the human form (Figure 23–35). In 2009, a new H1N1     suggests that this minor pandemic may
swine virus emerged that derived genes from pig, avian, and human influenza    have been caused by an accidental release
viruses. Such recombination events allowed the new virus to replicate rapidly and      of an influenza strain that had been held in
                                                                                       a laboratory since about 1950 or by the use
spread through an immunologically naïve human population. Generally, within 2                                                                                                               of this strain in a vaccine study. In 2009,
or 3 years, the human population develops immunity to a new recombinant strain    a new H1N1 swine virus emerged that
of virus, and the infection rate drops to a steady-state level. Because the recombi-    had derived five genes from pig influenza
nation events are unpredictable, it is not possible to know when the next influenza      viruses, two from avian influenza viruses,
                                                                                   and one from a human influenza virus. Aspandemic will occur or how severe it might be.                                                                                                            indicated, most human influenza today is
                                                                                      caused by H1N1 and H3N2 strains.
Drug-resistant Pathogens Are a Growing Problem

The development of drugs that cure rather than prevent infections has had a
major impact on human health. Antibiotics, which are either bactericidal (they
kill bacteria) or bacteriostatic (they inhibit bacterial growth without killing), are
the most successful class of such drugs. Penicillin was one of the first antibiotics

=== Original PDF page 1384 ===
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                                                     1345


                   cell membrane                DNA gyrase                                    Figure 23–36 Antibiotic targets. Although
                 polymixins                         quinolones                                         there are many antibiotics in clinical use,
                                                                                                   they have a narrow range of targets, which                                                    RNA polymerase
                                                                                                     are highlighted in blue. A few representative                                                                           rifampin
       cell-wall synthesis                                                                                         antibiotics in each class are listed. Nearly all                        DNA
        vancomycin                                                       protein synthesis,               antibiotics used to treat human infections
           penicillins                                                                  30S ribosome inhibitors                fall into one of these categories. The vast       cephalosporins                     mRNA
                                                                                     tetracycline                 majority inhibit either bacterial protein
       folic acid biosynthesis                                                 streptomycin               synthesis or bacterial cell-wall synthesis.
         trimethoprim                                                    protein synthesis,           The illustration example is a Gram-positive
          sulfonamides                                                                             bacterium.                                                                  50S ribosome inhibitors
                                                                         erythromycin
                                                                       chloramphenicol


used to treat infections in humans, just in time to prevent tens of thousands of
deaths from infected battlefield wounds in World War II. Because bacteria (see
Figure 1–9) are not closely related evolutionarily to the eukaryotes they infect,
much of their basic machinery for cell-wall synthesis, DNA replication and
transcription, RNA translation, and metabolism differs from that of their host.
These differences enable us to develop antibacterial drugs that exhibit selective
toxicity, in that they specifically inhibit these processes in bacteria without dis-
rupting them in the host. Most of the antibiotics that we use to treat bacterial
infections are small molecules that inhibit macromolecular synthesis in bacteria
by targeting bacterial enzymes that either are distinct from their eukaryotic coun-
terparts or are involved in pathways such as cell-wall biosynthesis that are absent in
animals (Figure 23–36; see also Table 6–4).
   However, bacteria continually evolve and strains resistant to antibiotics rap-
idly develop, often within a few years of the introduction of a new drug. Similar
drug resistance also arises rapidly when treating viral infections with antiviral
drugs. The virus population in an HIV-infected person treated with the reverse
transcriptase inhibitor azidothymidine (AZT), for example, will acquire complete
resistance to the drug within a few months. The current protocol for treatment of
HIV infections involves the simultaneous use of three drugs, which helps to mini-                                                                                             Figure 23–37 Three general mechanisms
mize the acquisition of resistance for any one of them. Even eukaryotic pathogens     of antibiotic resistance. (A) A nonresistant
rapidly evolve resistance. The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is now     wild-type bacterial cell bathed in a drug
generally resistant to the heavily used drug chloroquine, which was introduced in     (red triangles) that binds to and inhibits
                                                                                     an essential enzyme (light green) will bethe 1930s, and resistance to the newer drug artemisinin is emerging.                                                                                                                              killed because of enzyme inhibition. (B) A
   There are three general strategies by which a pathogen can develop drug     bacterium that has altered the drug’s target
resistance: (1) it can alter the molecular target of the drug so that it is no longer    enzyme so that the drug no longer binds
sensitive to the drug; (2) it can produce an enzyme that modifies or destroys the     to the enzyme will survive and proliferate.
drug; or (3) it can prevent the drug’s access to the drug target by, for example,      In many cases, a single point mutation in
                                                                                                    the gene encoding the target protein canactively pumping the drug out of the pathogen (Figure 23–37).                                                                                               generate resistance. (C) A bacterium that
                                                                                             expresses an enzyme (dark green) that
                          antibiotic      critical                                                                  either degrades or covalently modifies the
                               enzyme
                                                                                           drug will survive and proliferate. Some
                                                                                                                resistant bacteria, for example, make
                                                                                            β-lactamase enzymes, which cleave
                                                                                                                             penicillin and similar molecules. (D) A
                                                                                              bacterium that expresses or up-regulates
                                                                                     an efflux pump that ejects the drug from
                                                                                                    the bacterial cytoplasm (using energy
                                                                                                    derived from either ATP hydrolysis or
               (A)  antibiotic kills wild-type bacterium                                                   the electrochemical gradient across the
                                                                                                                bacterial plasma membrane) will survive
         altered critical enzyme       protein that degrades drug    efﬂux pump                    and proliferate. Some efflux pumps, such
                                                                                          as the TetR efflux pump, are specific for
                                                                                       a single drug (in this case, tetracycline),
                                                                                       whereas others, called multidrug resistance
                                                                                    (MDR) efflux pumps, are capable of
                                                                                                     exporting a wide variety of structurally
                                                                                                                  dissimilar drugs. Up-regulation of an MDR
                                                                        pump can render a bacterium resistant to a
                                          antibiotic-resistant bacteria                                                                                                      very large number of different antibiotics in
  (B)                                       (C)                                   (D)                        a single step.

=== Original PDF page 1385 ===
1346   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


  Once a pathogen has chanced upon an effective drug-resistance strategy, the
newly acquired or mutated genes that confer the resistance are frequently spread
throughout the pathogen population by horizontal gene transfer. They may even
spread between pathogens of different species. The highly effective but expen-
sive antibiotic vancomycin, for example, is used as a treatment of last resort for
many severe, hospital-acquired, Gram-positive bacterial infections that are resis-
tant to most other known antibiotics. Vancomycin prevents one step in bacterial
cell-wall synthesis—the cross-linking of peptidoglycan chains in the bacterial cell
wall (see Figure 23–3B). Resistance can arise if the bacterium synthesizes a cell
wall using different subunits that do not bind vancomycin. The most devastat-
ing form of vancomycin resistance depends on the acquisition of a transposon
(see Figure 5–58) containing seven genes, the products of which work together to
sense the presence of vancomycin, shut down the normal pathway for bacterial
cell-wall synthesis, and produce a different type of cell wall.
   Drug-resistance genes acquired by horizontal transfer frequently come from
environmental microbial reservoirs. Nearly all antibiotics used to treat bacterial
infections today are based on natural products produced by fungi or bacteria.
Penicillin, for example, is made by the mold Penicillium, and more than 50% of
the antibiotics currently used in the clinic are made by Gram-positive bacteria of
the genus Streptomyces, which reside in the soil. It is believed that microorgan-
isms produce antimicrobial compounds, many of which have probably existed
on Earth for hundreds of millions of years, as weapons in their competition with
other microorganisms in the environment. Surveys of bacteria taken from soil
samples that have never been exposed to antibiotic drugs used in modern medi-
cine reveal that there are bacteria already resistant to about seven or eight of the
antibiotics widely used in clinical practice. When pathogenic microorganisms
are faced with the selective pressure provided by antibiotic treatments, they can
apparently draw upon the immense source of genetic material in environmental
microbial reservoirs to acquire resistance.
   Like most other aspects of infectious disease, human behavior has exacer-
bated the problem of drug resistance. Many patients take antibacterial antibiotics
for symptoms that are typically caused by viruses (flu-like illnesses, colds, and
sore throats), and these drugs have no effects. Persistent and chronic misuse of
antibiotics can eventually result in antibiotic-resistant microbes, which can then
transfer the resistance to pathogens. Antibiotics are also misused in the livestock
industry, where they are commonly employed as food additives to promote the
growth and health of farm animals. An antibiotic closely related to vancomycin
was commonly added to cattle feed in Europe; the resulting resistance in the
microbiota of these animals is widely believed to be one of the original sources
for vancomycin-resistant bacteria that now threaten the lives of hospitalized
patients.

Summary

All pathogens share the ability to interact with host cells in diverse ways that
promote pathogen replication and spread. Pathogens often colonize the host by
adhering to or invading the epithelial surfaces that line the respiratory, gastrointes-
tinal, and urinary tracts, as well as the other body surfaces in direct contact with the
environment. Intracellular pathogens, including all viruses and many bacteria and
protozoa, invade host cells by one of several mechanisms. Viruses rely largely on
receptor-mediated endocytosis, whereas bacteria exploit cell adhesion and phago-
cytic pathways; in both cases, the host cell provides the machinery and energy for
the invasion. Protozoa, by contrast, employ unique invasion strategies that usually
require significant energy expenditure on the part of the invader. Once inside, intra-
cellular pathogens seek out a cell compartment that is favorable for their survival
and replication, frequently altering host membrane traffic, exploiting the host-cell
cytoskeleton for intracellular movement, and manipulating autophagy. Pathogens
evolve rapidly, so that new infectious diseases frequently emerge, and old pathogens
acquire new ways to evade our attempts at prevention, treatment, and eradication.

=== Original PDF page 1386 ===
THE HUMAN MICROBIOTA                                                                  1347


Because the acquisition of drug resistance is almost inevitable, it is crucial that we
take measures to delay the onset of resistance and develop innovative new drug
treatments.

THE HUMAN MICROBIOTA
Although pathogens can cause disease in otherwise healthy humans, it is now
appreciated that our bodies are colonized by many microbes that normally
cause no harm. These microbes compose the so-called microbiota. Recent
estimates suggest that the human body contains about 3 × 1013 human cells, as
well as approximately 4 × 1013 resident microbial cells. As detailed below, we now
appreciate that the microbiota is a complex microbial community that makes
important contributions to human biology.

The Human Microbiota Is a Complex Ecological System

The human microbiota is usually confined to specific locations of the body
(Figure 23–38), including the skin, mouth, digestive tract, and vagina, with
distinct communities of species inhabiting each body part. Of the resident
microbes, bacterial cells make up the vast majority by sheer numbers (>99%),
whereas there are smaller numbers of archaeal, fungal, and protozoan cells. The
concentrations and total numbers of microbial cells differ vastly between body
locations (Figure 23–38), with the large intestine containing by far the most
microbial residents.
   The microbiota of an individual person consists of thousands of different
microbial species. The species composition varies considerably between individ-
ual humans, even between close relatives or identical twins. Different body sites
also have different degrees of species diversity. The digestive tract, for example,
contains between 500 and 1000 species, most belonging to only a few phyla of
bacteria. The microbiota of the digestive tract also provides an interesting illustra-
tion of how the diversity and composition of microbial species can change over
time, from birth through adulthood. The digestive tract of human infants is colo­
nized by environmental microbes during birth, and the mode of birth (vaginal
delivery versus cesarean section) can influence species composition. During the
first year of life, the microbiota consists of fewer species that vary considerably
over time and between individuals, whereas species diversity increases and com-
position stabilizes at 1–2 years of age. Thereafter, the microbiota of an individual
is generally consistent over time but is influenced by a variety of factors, including
age, pregnancy, diet, health status, hygiene, and antibiotic use.
   To appreciate the contributions of the microbiota to human biology, it is
helpful to consider the various ecological terms that are used to classify relation-
ships between microbes and their host. For the pathogens discussed earlier in
this chapter, the microbe benefits to the detriment of the host, a situation referred
to as parasitism. In contrast, most constituents of the microbiota exhibit less
sinister ecological relationships with the host. Some exhibit commensalism,
which describes the circumstance in which the microbe benefits but has no
known beneficial or harmful effects on the host. In mutualism, both the microbe
and host benefit. It is sometimes difficult to draw a line between these categories.





           MOUTH MICROBIOTA                     DIGESTIVE TRACT
               1012                        MICROBIOTA                                                             large intestine 1013
                                                                                             Figure 23–38 Sites in the human body                SKIN MICROBIOTA                          small intestine 1011
                                                     stomach    107                       skin, mouth, and digestive tract. An               1011                                                                       that harbor the microbiota include the
                                                                                                   estimate of the total number of microbes in
                                                                                      each location is indicated.

=== Original PDF page 1387 ===
1348   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


Some constituents of the microbiota that exhibit commensalism or mutualism
under normal circumstances can also act as parasites or opportunistic pathogens
that can cause disease if our immune systems are weakened or if they gain access
to a normally sterile part of the body.

The Microbiota Influences Our Development and Health

It is increasingly recognized that many constituents of the human microbiota
exhibit a mutualistic relationship with our bodies by supporting metabolism,
development, and immunity (Figure 23–39). The anaerobic bacteria that inhabit
our intestines, for example, gain shelter and a nutrient supply but also contrib-
ute to the digestion of our food and produce important metabolites. One reason
for the beneficial influence of the microbiota on our metabolism is that the com-
bined genomes of the various microbial species, called the microbiome, contain
100 times more genes than the number in the human genome itself. A consequence
of this genomic diversity is that the microbiota expands the range of biochemical
activities available to humans by producing small-molecule metabolites of dif-
ferent chemical composition or in greater abundance than that produced by our
own cells. An example is the production of abundant short-chain fatty acids by
the microbiota in the digestive tract, which may contribute to metabolism and
may also signal to our cells to influence human physiology.
   The microbiota is also important for normal development, most notably of
the epithelial tissue and immune system in the digestive tract. Studies comparing
mice with and without a gastrointestinal microbiota (so-called germ-free mice)
show that the microbiota affects properties of the intestinal lining including
villus geometry, stem-cell proliferation, blood vessel density, and mucus thick-
ness (Figure 23–39). The mucosal immune system that is associated with the
mucus-containing surface of the intestinal epithelium is also strongly influenced
by the microbiota. The mucosal immune system must be fine-tuned to be non-
responsive to beneficial microbes in the microbiota, yet responsive to pathogens
and microbes that inappropriately penetrate into the epithelial layer. The micro-
biota plays an important role in the development of lymphoid tissues and in the
appropriate differentiation of various immune cell types to control the overall
number, species composition, and location of microbes in the digestive tract
(Figure 23–39).
   There is increasing evidence that an imbalance in the community of microbes
that constitute the microbiota, referred to as dysbiosis, is correlated with vari-
ous human diseases. These include autoimmune and allergic diseases, obesity,


                   LUMEN OF GUT                microbiota




                            nutrients and    villus geometry     mucosal
                               signaling       and cell       immunity
                            molecules        biology





                                                              villus
                          mucus                    mucus



                                                                                             Figure 23–39 Influences of the
                                                                                           microbiota on metabolism and
                                                                                      development. The microbiota (not drawn
                                                                                                          exactly to scale) produces nutrients as well
                                                                                          as signaling molecules that affect host-cell
                                          crypt                                                            biology and physiology and also influences
                                                                                                    the development of the intestinal epithelium
                                                                                   and the mucosal immune system.

=== Original PDF page 1388 ===
THE HUMAN MICROBIOTA                                                                  1349


inflammatory bowel disease, and diabetes, and the list is expanding rapidly.
A common example of a disease caused by dysbiosis is colitis, which occurs
in response to antibiotic treatment that kills off beneficial microbes in the diges-
tive tract, resulting in overgrowth of the bacterial pathogen Clostridium difficile.
Although first-line treatment for colitis is an additional course of antibiotics,
recurrent colitis has been successfully treated by the transfer of the microbiota
from a healthy individual to someone suffering from the disease.
   As research intensifies into the influences of the microbiota on human health
and disease, a future challenge will be to shift scientific inquiry from investigation
of correlations and associations between the presence of certain microbes and
health status to investigation of whether there are causal relationships between the
composition of the microbiota and its molecular products and health or disease.
An impediment to making this shift is the sheer number of variables that must be
considered when studying a community consisting of hundreds of microbial spe-
cies that produce thousands of proteins and small molecules. One path forward
may be to search for clear instances in which individual microbes or molecules
exert strong effects on human physiology. As microbiomes with defined composi­
tion are developed and genetic tools are improved, we may begin to understand
how individual microbial species or even individual microbial genes influence
human development and health, and we may be able to harness the microbiome
to treat human disease.

Summary

Humans are colonized by a community of microbes, collectively called the microbi-
ota, that consists of roughly the same number of microbial cells as there are human
cells in the body and is located primarily on the skin, in the mouth, and in the diges-
tive tract. The microbiota as a whole is thought to exhibit a mutualistic ecological
relationship with the human host, meaning that both microbes and humans benefit
from their interactions. The microbiota produces nutrients that aid in metabolism,
as well as molecules that influence tissue and immune system development and
function. However, it has been difficult to establish causal relationships between
individual microbes or their molecular products and human health. Knowledge of
the microbiota is expanding rapidly, and advances promise to enhance our under-
standing of human biology and result in new disease treatments.

=== Original PDF page 1389 ===
1350   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection

PROBLEMS

Which statements are true? Explain why or why not.      in it. His conclusion ran counter to the then-current belief
                                                               that cholera was from “miasmas” in bad air. Very few
23–1   Pathogens must enter host cells to cause disease.     believed his theory during the next 50 years, with the “bad
                                                                   air” theory persisting until at least 1901. What do you sup-23–2   Viruses replicate their genomes in the nucleus of
                                                    pose Snow saw in the data that led him to his conclusion?
the host cell.
                                         Why do you think most scientists remained skeptical for
23–3   You should not take  antibiotics  for diseases    so long?
caused by viruses.                                                23–9   The Gram-negative bacterium Yersinia pestis, the
23–4   Our adult bodies harbor about 10 times more    causative agent of the plague, is extremely virulent. Upon
resident microbial cells than human cells.                     infection, Y. pestis injects a set of effector proteins into
                                                  macrophages that suppresses their phagocytic behavior
23–5   The microbiomes from healthy humans are all   and also interferes with their innate immune responses.
very similar.                                   One of the effector proteins, YopJ, acetylates serines and
                                                         threonines on various MAP kinases, including the MAP
Discuss the following problems.                         kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKK) TAK1, which controls a
                                                      key signaling step in the innate immune response pathway.
23–6   In order to survive and multiply, a successful                                                  To determine how YopJ interferes with TAK1, you trans-
pathogen must accomplish five tasks. Name them.                                                                   fect human cells with catalytically active YopJ (YopJWT)
                                                          or inactive YopJ (YopJC172A) and with FLAG-tagged active23–7   What are the three general mechanisms  for
                                              TAK1 (TAK1WT) or inactive TAK1 (TAK1K63W) and assayhorizontal gene transfer?
                                                                  for total TAK1 and for phosphorylated TAK1, using anti-
23–8   John Snow is widely regarded as the father of    bodies against the FLAG tag or against phosphorylated
modern epidemiology. Most famously, he investigated   TAK1 (Figure Q23–2). How does YopJ block the TAK1
an outbreak of cholera in London in 1854 that killed more    signaling pathway? How do you suppose the serine/
than 600 people before it was finished. Snow recorded    threonine acetylase activity of YopJ might interfere with
where the victims lived and plotted the data on a map,   TAK1 activation?
along with the locations of the water pumps that served
as the source of water for the public (Figure Q23–1). He                   TAK1  WT    WT    WT   K63W
concluded that the disease was most likely spread in the                                                                                      YopJ       -     C172A   WT           -
water, although he could find nothing suspicious-looking
                                                                                                                 IP: α-FLAG-TAK1
                                                                                                           IB: α-pTAK1                                     –76
                                                                                                                 IP: α-FLAG-TAK1                                 –76                                                                                 Oxford Street                                                                                                           IB: α-FLAG-TAK1

                                                                                             1      2       3       4                      Oxford Street
                                                                                     SohoSquare
                                                                    Figure Q23–2 Effects of YopJ on TAK1 phosphorylation (Problem
                                                      Street                                            23–9). TAK1 was immunoprecipitated (IP) using antibodies against the
                                      Marlborough                                  FLAG tag (α-FLAG-TAK1). Total TAK1 in the immunoprecipitation was
                                 Great
                                     Work                                        assayed by immunoblot (IB) using the same antibody. Phosphorylated
                                          House                                   TAK1 was assayed by IB using antibodies specific for phospho-TAK1
                                                                        Street                                  (α-pTAK1). A marker of protein molecular mass is shown at right
                                                       Broad                                               in kilodaltons. (From N. Paquette et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
                                                                109:12710–12715, 2012. With permission from National Academy of
                                                                           Sciences.)

                                  Regent                                                                     Avenue
                                                23–10  The intracellular bacterial pathogen Salmonella                                          Street                Golden                                               Shaftesbury                                                   Square                                    enterica serovar Typhimurium, which causes gastroen­
                                                                               teritis, injects effector proteins to promote its invasion
                                                              into nonphagocytic host cells by the trigger mechanism. S.
                                                               enterica serovar Typhimurium first stimulates membrane

                                                                                                Picadilly                                                                                          Circus                            ruffling to promote invasion, and then suppresses mem-
                                                     brane ruffling once invasion is complete. This behavior
Figure Q23–1 A map of where the victims of the 1854 cholera               is mediated in part by injection of two effector proteins:
outbreak lived, superimposed on a modern map of the area (Problem     SopE, which promotes membrane ruffling and invasion,
23–8). The locations of the victims’ houses are indicated by the small     and SptP, which blocks the effects of SopE. Both effector
red rectangles. Stacks of rectangles indicate multiple cases occurring
in the same house. Public water pumps are shown as blue squares.       proteins target the monomeric GTPase, Rac, which in its
(Adapted from Wellcome Library, London/Google Maps.)                 active form promotes membrane ruffling. How do you

=== Original PDF page 1390 ===
REFERENCES                                                                            1351


suppose SopE and SptP affect Rac activity? How do you   23–13  Avian influenza viruses readily infect birds but
suppose the effects of SopE and SptP are staggered in time    are transmitted to humans very rarely. Similarly, human
if they are injected simultaneously?                         influenza viruses spread readily to other humans but
                                                     have never been detected in birds. The key to this speci-
23–11  Several  negative-strand  viruses  carry  their                                                                            ficity lies in the viral capsid protein, hemagglutinin, which
genome as a set of discrete RNA segments. Examples                                                       binds to sialic acid residues on cell-surface glycoproteins,
include influenza virus (eight segments), Rift Valley fever                                                                triggering virus entry into the cell (Movie 23.8). Hemag-
virus (three segments), hantavirus (three segments), and                                                               glutinin on human viruses recognizes sialic acid in a 2,6
Lassa virus (two segments), to name a few. Why does seg-                                                            linkage with galactose, whereas avian hemagglutinin rec-
mentation of the genome provide a strong evolutionary                                                         ognizes sialic acid in a 2,3 linkage with galactose. Humans
advantage for these viruses?                                             make carbohydrate chains that have only the 2,6 linkage
                                                   between sialic acid and galactose; birds make only the23–12  Influenza epidemics account for 250,000–500,000
                                                               2,3 linkage; but pigs make carbohydrate chains with bothdeaths globally each year. These epidemics are markedly
                                                               linkages. How does this situation make pigs ideal hosts forseasonal, occurring in temperate climates in the North-
                                                          generating new strains of human influenza viruses?ern and Southern Hemispheres during their respective
winters. By contrast, in the tropics, there is significant   23–14  The majority of antibiotics used in the clinic are
influenza activity year round, with a peak in the rainy                                            made as natural products by bacteria. Why do you suppose
season (Figure Q23–3). Can you suggest some possible    bacteria make the very agents we use to kill them?
explanations for the patterns of influenza epidemics in
temperate zones and the tropics?                       23–15  In the early days of penicillin research, it was dis-
                                                       covered that bacteria in the air could destroy the penicillin,
                                Northern       Southern            a big problem for large-scale production of the drug. How
                              Hemisphere    Hemisphere          do you suppose this occurs?

                                                23–16 When the Oxford team of Ernst Chain and Nor-      inﬂuenza           tropics                                         man Heatley had laboriously collected their first two grams
 of
                                                                of penicillin (probably no more than 2% pure!), Chain
   cases                                                          injected two normal mice with 1 g each of this preparation
                                                and waited to see what would happen. The mice survived
      J F M A M  J  J A S O N D  J F M A M  J  J A S O N D     with no apparent ill effects. His boss, Howard Florey, was
                           month                             furious at what he saw as a waste of good antibiotic. Why
Figure Q23–3 Seasonal patterns of influenza epidemics (Problem       was this experiment important?
23–12). Cases of influenza at different times of the year are shown for
the Northern Hemisphere (blue), the Southern Hemisphere (orange),
and the tropics (red).

REFERENCES
General                                                        Faruque SM & Mekalanos JJ (2012) Phage-bacterial interactions in the
                                                                                  evolution of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae. Virulence 3, 556–565.Acheson NH (2021) Fundamentals of Molecular Virology, 3rd ed.
                                                                  Galán JE & Gabriel Waksman G (2018) Protein-injection machines in   Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
                                                                                    bacteria. Cell 172, 1306–1318.Cossart P, Roy CR & Sansonetti P (eds.) (2019) Bacteria and
                                                                  Rappleye CA & Goldman WE (2006) Defining virulence genes in the     Intracellularity. Washington, DC: ASM Press.
                                                                         dimorphic fungi. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 60, 281–303.Fauci A & Morens DM (2012) The perpetual challenge of infectious
                                                             Soucy S, Huang J & Gogarten J (2015) Horizontal gene transfer:    diseases. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 454–461.
                                                                                    building the web of life. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 472–482.Gunn A & Pitt SJ (2012) Parasitology: An Integrated Approach.
                                                             Young JAT & Collier RJ (2007) Anthrax toxin: receptor binding,   Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
                                                                                           internalization, pore formation, and translocation. Annu. Rev.Heitman J, Filler SG, Edwards JE & Mitchell AP (2006) Molecular
                                                                    Biochem. 76, 243–265.    Principles of Fungal Pathogenesis. Washington, DC: ASM Press.
Wilson BA, Winkler ME & Ho BT (2019) Bacterial Pathogenesis: A         Cell Biology of Pathogen Infection
    Molecular Approach, 4th ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press.                                                                          Asrat S, de Jesús DA, Hempstead AD . . . Isberg RR (2014) Bacterial
                                                                    pathogen manipulation of host membrane trafficking. Annu. Rev.
Introduction to Pathogens                                                 Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 79–109.
Baltimore D (1971) Expression of animal virus genomes. Bacteriol. Rev.      Davies J & Davies D (2010) Origins and evolution of antibiotic
    35, 235–241.                                                                 resistance. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 74, 417–433.
Coffin JM (2021) 50th anniversary of the discovery of reverse                 Faria NR, Rambaut A, Suchard MA . . . Lemey P (2014) HIV
    transcriptase Mol. Biol. Cell 32, 91–97.                                    epidemiology. The early spread and epidemic ignition of HIV-1 in
Cowman AF, Healer J, Marapana D & Marsh K (2016) Malaria: biology        human populations. Science 346, 56–61.
   and disease. Cell 167, 610–624.                                    Forsberg KJ, Reyes A, Wang B . . . Dantas G (2012) The shared
Crick FH & Watson JD (1956) Structure of small viruses. Nature 177,              antibiotic resistome of soil bacteria and human pathogens. Science
   473–475.                                                           337, 1107–1111.

=== Original PDF page 1391 ===
1352   Chapter 23:  Pathogens and Infection


Goldberg DE, Siliciano RF & Jacobs WR, Jr (2012) Outwitting evolution:    Sun E, He J & Zhuang X (2013) Live cell imaging of viral entry. Curr.
     fighting drug-resistant TB, malaria, and HIV. Cell 148, 1271–1283.          Opin. Virol. 3, 34–43.
Grove J & Marsh M (2011) The cell biology of receptor-mediated virus        Tilney LG & Portnoy DA (1989) Actin filaments and the growth,
     entry. J. Cell Biol. 195, 1071–1082.                                 movement, and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite,
Hartenian E, Nandakumar D, Lari A . . . Glaunsinger BA (2020) The                Listeria monocytogenes. J. Cell Biol. 109, 1597–1608.
    molecular virology of coronaviruses. J. Biol. Chem. 295, 12910–        Vink C, Rudenko G & Seifert HS (2012) Microbial antigenic variation
   12934.                                                            mediated by homologous DNA recombination. FEMS Microbiol.
Hernandez-Gonzalez M, Larocque G & Way M (2021) Viral use and             Rev. 36, 917–948.
    subversion of membrane organization and trafficking. J. Cell Sci.       Walsh D, Mathews MB & Mohr I (2013) Tinkering with translation:
    134, jcs252676.                                                             protein synthesis in virus-infected cells. Cold Spring Harb.
Huang J & Brumell J (2014) Bacteria–autophagy interplay: a battle for           Perspect. Biol. 5, a012351.
     survival. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 101–114.                         Welch MD & Way M (2013) Arp2/3-mediated actin-based motility:
Mengaud J, Ohayon H, Gounon P . . . Cossart P (1996) E-cadherin is          a tail of pathogen abuse. Cell Host Microbe 14, 242–255.
    the receptor for internalin, a surface protein required for entry of L.     Worobey M, Watts TD, McKay RA . . . Jaffe HW (2016) 1970s and
   monocytogenes into epithelial cells. Cell 84, 923–932.                        ‘Patient 0’ HIV-1 genomes illuminate early HIV/AIDS history in
Petrova V & Russell C (2018) The evolution of seasonal influenza               North America. Nature 39, 98–101.
    viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 47–60.
Polk DB & Peek RM, Jr (2010) Helicobacter pylori: gastric cancer and     The Human Microbiota
   beyond. Nat. Rev. Cancer 10, 403–414.                           Fan Y & Pedersen O (2021) Gut microbiota in human metabolic health
Ray K, Marteyn B, Sansonetti PJ & Tang CM (2009) Life on the inside:         and disease. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 55–71.
    the intracellular lifestyle of cytosolic bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7,     Fischbach MA (2019) Microbiome: focus on causation and mechanism.
   333–340.                                                                         Cell 174, 785–790.
Ribet D & Cossart P (2015) How bacterial pathogens colonize their         Sender R, Fuchs S & Milo M (2016) Are we really vastly outnumbered?
    hosts and invade deeper tissues. Microbes Infect. 17, 173–183.              Revisiting the ratio of bacterial to host cells in humans. Cell 164,
Sibley LD (2011) Invasion and intracellular survival by protozoan               337–340.
    parasites. Immunol. Rev. 240, 72–91.