=== Original PDF page 40 ===
    PAIR T        II        III   IV  V

INTRODUCTION TO THE CELL





                                             C H A P T E R
Cells, Genomes, and the
Diversity of Life           1





The surface of our planet is populated by living things—organisms—curious,
intricately organized chemical factories that take in matter from their sur-                                                                 IN THIS CHAPTER
roundings and use these raw materials to generate copies of themselves. These
organisms appear extraordinarily diverse. What could be more different than a   The Universal Features of Life
tiger and a piece of seaweed or a butterfly and a tree? Yet our ancestors, knowing                                                               on Earthnothing of cells or DNA, saw that all these things had something in common.
They called that something “life,” marveled at it, struggled to define it, and                                                        Genome Diversification and the
despaired of explaining what it was or how it worked in terms that relate to non-
                                                                            Tree of Lifeliving matter.
   The remarkable discoveries of the past 100 years or so have not diminished the
                                                                        Eukaryotes and the Origin of themarvel—quite the contrary. But they have removed the central mystery regarding
the nature of life. We can now see that all living things are made of cells: small,    Eukaryotic Cell
membrane-enclosed units filled with a concentrated aqueous solution of chemi-
cals and endowed with the extraordinary ability to create copies of themselves by   Model Organisms
growing and then dividing in two.
   Because cells are the fundamental units of life, it is to cell biology—the study
of the structure, function, and behavior of cells—that we must look for answers
to the questions of what life is and how it works. With a deeper understand-
ing of cells and their evolution, we can begin to tackle the grand historical
problems of life on Earth: its mysterious origins, its stunning diversity, and
its invasion of every conceivable habitat. Indeed, as emphasized long ago by
the pioneering cell biologist E. B. Wilson, “the key to every biological problem
must finally be sought in the cell; for every living organism is, or at some time
has been, a cell.”
   Despite their apparent diversity, living things are fundamentally similar
inside. The whole of biology is thus a counterpoint between two themes: aston-
ishing variety in individual particulars and astonishing constancy in fundamental
mechanisms. In this chapter, we begin by outlining the universal features com-
mon to all life on our planet, along with some of the fundamental properties of
their cells. We then discuss how an analysis of DNA genomes allows scientists
to position the wide variety of organisms in an evolutionary “tree of life.” This                             1

=== Original PDF page 41 ===
2      Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


approach, which quantifies how closely organisms are related to one another,
allows us to identify the three major branches of life on Earth, eukaryotes, bacte-
ria, and archaea—each with unique qualities. We shall see that the familiar world
of plants and animals—the focus of scientists for many centuries—makes up only
a small slice of the complete diversity of life, the vast majority of which is invisible
to the unaided human eye.
   After exploring some of the ways that genomes change over evolutionary
times, we highlight the handful of model organisms that biologists have chosen
to focus on to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying life. A few specific
viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, pose grave threats to humans, so they too have
become objects of intensive study. For this reason, this section also includes an
introduction to viruses, the ubiquitous parasites that have evolved to feed on
cells. Viruses are now recognized to be the most abundant biological entities on
the planet.

THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
There are more than 2 million described species living on Earth today, but many,
many more are yet to be discovered. Each species is different, and each repro-
duces itself faithfully, yielding progeny that are unique to that species. Thus, the
parent organism hands down information specifying, in extraordinary detail,
the characteristics that the offspring will have. This phenomenon of heredity is
central to the definition of life: it distinguishes life from other processes, such as
the growth of a crystal, or the burning of a candle, or the formation of waves on
water, in which structures are generated without the same type of link between
the peculiarities of parents and offspring. A living organism must consume free
energy to exist, as does a candle flame. But life employs this free energy to drive
a very complex system of chemical reactions that create and maintain the intri-
cate organization of its cells, all as specified by the hereditary information in
those cells.
   Most living organisms are single cells. Others, such as us, are like vast multicel-
lular cities in which groups of cells perform specialized functions that are linked
by intricate systems of intercellular communication. But even for the aggregate
of more than 1013 cells that makes up a human body, the whole organism has
been generated by cell divisions from a single cell. The single cell therefore con-
tains all of the hereditary information that defines a species (Figure 1–1). The cell
must also contain all of the machinery needed to gather raw materials from the
environment and to construct from them a new cell in its own image, complete
with a new copy of the hereditary information of its parent. Every cell on Earth is
truly amazing.

All Cells Store Their Hereditary Information in the Form
of Double-Strand DNA Molecules

Computers have made us familiar with the concept of information as a measur-
able quantity—106 bytes to record a few hundred pages of text or an image from
a digital camera, 109 bytes for a 60-minute video streamed from the Internet, and
so on. Computers have also made us well aware that the same information can
be recorded in many different physical forms: the discs and tapes that we used
25 years ago for our electronic archives have become unreadable on present-day
machines. Living cells, like computers, store information, and it is estimated that
they have been evolving and diversifying for more than 3.5 billion years. One
might not expect that they would all store their information in the same form or
that the hereditary information carried by one type of cell should be readable by
the information-handling machinery of another. And yet it is so. This fact pro-
vides compelling evidence that all living things on Earth have inherited the form
of their genetic instructions, as well as how to use them, from a universal com-
mon ancestral cell. This ancestor is thought to have existed roughly 3.5–3.8 billion
years ago.

=== Original PDF page 42 ===
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH                                                    3





            (A)                                                       (C)                                                           (E)
                      100 µm                                       50 µm                                          50 µm





(B)                                                   (D)                                                            (F)

Figure 1–1 The hereditary information in the fertilized egg cell determines the nature of the whole multicellular
organism that will develop from it. As indicated, although their starting cells look superficially similar, the egg of a sea
urchin gives rise to a sea urchin (A and B), the egg of a mouse gives rise to a mouse (C and D), and the egg of the seaweed
Fucus gives rise to a Fucus seaweed (E and F). (A, courtesy of David McClay; B, courtesy of Tim Hunt; C, courtesy of Patricia
Calarco, from G. Martin, Science 209:768–776, 1980. With permission from AAAS; D, Rudmer Zwerver/Alamy Stock Photo;
E and F, courtesy of Colin Brownlee.)



    All cells on Earth today store their hereditary information in the form of
double-strand molecules of DNA—long, unbranched, paired polymer chains,
which are always composed of the same four types of monomers. These mono-
mers, chemical compounds known as nucleotides, have nicknames drawn from
a four-letter alphabet—A, T, C, G—and they are strung together in a long linear
sequence that encodes the hereditary information, just as the sequence of 1’s and
0’s encodes the information in a computer file. We can take a piece of DNA from a
human cell and insert it into a bacterium or a piece of bacterial DNA and insert it
into a human cell, and, with only a few minor modifications, the information will
be successfully read, interpreted, and copied. As we describe in Chapter 8, scien-
tists can now rapidly read out the sequence of nucleotides in any DNA molecule
and thereby determine the complete DNA sequence of any cell’s genome—the
totality of its hereditary information embodied in the linear sequence of nucleo­
tides in its DNA. As a result, we now know the complete genome sequences for
tens of thousands of species, ranging from the smallest bacterium to the largest
plants and animals on Earth.

All Cells Replicate Their Hereditary Information
by Templated Polymerization

The mechanisms that make  life possible depend on the structure of the
double-strand DNA molecule. We discuss this remarkable molecule in detail
in Chapters 4 and 5; here we provide only an overview of its structure and
means of reproduction. Each monomer in a single DNA strand—that is, each
nucleotide—consists of two parts: a sugar (deoxyribose) with a phosphate
group attached to it, and a base, which may be either adenine (A), guanine (G),

=== Original PDF page 43 ===
4      Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life



(A)   building block of DNA                                               (D)   double-strand DNA
   phosphate
           sugar

              G       +
                                                              C   A    T    T   G    C    C   A   G    T        sugar–    base         G
      phosphate                                nucleotide                       G    T   A   A    C   G   G    T    C   A


(B)  DNA strand


                                                                                        sugar–phosphate
   G    T   A   A    C   G   G    T    C   A                                 backbone
                                                                                                                 hydrogen-bonded
                                                                                                                            base pairs
                                                                                      (E)  DNA double helix


(C)  templated polymerization of new strand

                    nucleotide
                monomers                                                          C
                                                                               T    A                                                               C   A                   C
                      A                      A            G
              G                                                                                    T
                     G                            G
                  C                              T                   G        G
    C   A    T    T                                     G
                                                                                       C
                                                                                 A     C   A   G    T   A   A    C   G   G    T    C   A                                          C


Figure 1–2 DNA and its building blocks. (A) DNA is made from simple subunits, called nucleotides. Each nucleotide
consists of a specific arrangement of about 35 covalently linked atoms, forming a sugar–phosphate molecule with a nitrogen-
containing side group, or base, attached to it. The bases are of four types (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine),
corresponding to four distinct nucleotides, labeled A, G, C, and T. (B) A single strand of DNA consists of nucleotides joined
together by sugar–phosphate linkages. Note that the individual sugar–phosphate units are asymmetric, giving the backbone
of the strand a definite directionality, or polarity. This directionality guides the molecular processes by which the information in
DNA is both interpreted and copied (replicated) in cells: the information is always “read” in a consistent order, just as written
English text is read from left to right. (C) Through templated polymerization, the sequence of nucleotides in an existing DNA
strand controls the sequence in which nucleotides are joined together in a new DNA strand; T in one strand pairs with A in
the other, and G in one strand with C in the other. The new strand therefore has a nucleotide sequence complementary to
that of the old strand and a backbone with opposite directionality: thus, GTAA... in the original strand, is ...TTAC in the new
strand. (D) A normal DNA molecule consists of two such complementary strands. The nucleotides within each strand are
linked by strong (covalent) chemical bonds; the complementary nucleotides on opposite strands are held together more
weakly, by hydrogen bonds. (E) The two strands twist around each other to form a double helix—a robust structure that can
accommodate any sequence of nucleotides without altering its basic double-helical structure (see Movie 4.1).



cytosine (C), or thymine (T) (Figure 1–2). Each sugar is linked to the next via
the phosphate group, creating a polymer chain composed of a repetitive sugar–
phosphate backbone with a series of bases protruding from it. The DNA polymer
is extended by adding monomers at one end. For a single isolated strand, these
monomers can, in principle, be added in any order, because each one links to
the next in the same way, through the part of the molecule that is the same for
all of them. In the living cell, however, DNA is not synthesized as a free strand
in isolation, but on a template formed by a preexisting DNA strand. The bases
that protrude from this template can bind to bases of the strand being synthe-
sized, according to a strict rule defined by the complementary structures of the
bases: A binds to T, and C binds to G. This base-pairing holds fresh monomers
in place and thereby controls the selection of which one of the four monomers
will next be added to a growing strand. In this way, a double-strand structure is
created, consisting of two exactly complementary sequences of A’s, C’s, T’s, and
G’s. These two strands twist around each other, forming a DNA double helix (see
Figure 1–2E).
  Compared with the covalent sugar–phosphate bonds, the hydrogen bonds
between the base pairs are weak, which allows the two DNA strands to be

=== Original PDF page 44 ===
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH                                                    5


                                                   template strand                               Figure 1–3 The copying of genetic
                                                                                               information by DNA replication. In this
                                                                                                 process, the two strands of a DNA double
                                                                                                                      helix are pulled apart, and each serves
                                                                                          as a template for the synthesis of a new
                                         new strand                                 complementary strand. The end result is
                                                                                     two daughter DNA double helices that
                                                                                                     are identical in sequence to the parent
                                         new strand                                  double helix.

         parent DNA double helix



                                                   template strand


pulled apart without breakage of their backbones. Each strand then can serve
as a template, in the way just described, for the synthesis of a fresh DNA strand
complementary to itself—a fresh copy, that is, of the hereditary information
(Figure 1–3). In different types of cells, this process of DNA replication occurs
at different rates, with different controls to start it or stop it, and with different
auxiliary molecules to help the process along (discussed in Chapters 5 and 17).
But the basics are universal: DNA is the information store for heredity, and tem-
plated polymerization is the way in which this information is copied throughout
the living world.

All Cells Transcribe Portions of Their DNA into RNA Molecules

To carry out its information-bearing function, DNA must do more than copy itself.
It must also express its information, by letting the information guide the synthesis
of other molecules in the cell. This expression occurs by a mechanism that is the
same in all living organisms, leading first and foremost to the production of two
other crucial classes of biological polymers: RNA molecules and protein mole-                                                                                              DNA
cules. The process begins with a templated polymerization called transcription,
in which segments of the DNA sequence are used as templates for the synthe-
sis of shorter molecules of the closely related polymer ribonucleic acid, or RNA.
Subsequently, in a process called translation, many of these RNA molecules            DNA synthesis
direct the synthesis of polymers of a radically different chemical class—the pro-                REPLICATION      DNA
teins (Figure 1–4). The detailed chemical reactions involved are presented in
Chapter 6; here they will only be briefly outlined.
   The backbone of an RNA molecule is formed by a slightly different sugar from
that in DNA—ribose instead of deoxyribose; in addition, one of the four bases is                 RNA synthesis
slightly different—uracil (U) replaces thymine (T). Most important, however, the        nucleotides     TRANSCRIPTION
other three bases—A, C, and G—are identical to those in DNA, and all four bases                            RNA
will pair with their complementary counterparts in DNA—the A, U, C, and G of
RNA with the T, A, G, and C of DNA, respectively. During transcription, this pair-
ing allows the RNA monomers to be lined up and selected for polymerization on                        protein synthesis
                                                                                                      TRANSLATION
a template strand of DNA, just as DNA monomers are selected during replication.
The outcome is a single-strand polymer molecule whose sequence of nucleotides                              PROTEIN
faithfully represents a portion of the cell’s genetic information, even though it is
written in a slightly different alphabet—consisting of the four RNA monomers            amino acids
instead of the four DNA monomers.
                                                                                             Figure 1–4 From DNA to protein. In   The same segment of DNA can be used repeatedly to guide the synthesis                                                                                                         addition to DNA replication (shown at the
of many identical RNA molecules. Thus, whereas the cell’s archive of genetic     top of the figure), genetic information is
information in the form of DNA is fixed and sacrosanct, RNA transcripts are     read out and put to use through a two-step
mass-produced and disposable. Most of these transcripts function as intermedi-     process: First, in transcription, segments
ates in the transfer of genetic information by serving as messenger RNA (mRNA)      of the DNA sequence are used to guide
                                                                                                    the synthesis of molecules of RNA. Then,molecules that guide the synthesis of proteins according to the genetic instruc-                                                                                                                             in translation, RNA molecules are used to
tions stored in the DNA. But as we discuss in Chapter 6, some RNA transcripts     guide the synthesis of proteins, which are
do not serve as information carriers; instead, they function directly in the cell to     polymers made of amino acid subunits
carry out a variety of other functions.                                                       (discussed shortly).

=== Original PDF page 45 ===
6      Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life

All Cells Use Proteins as Catalysts
Like DNA and RNA molecules, protein molecules are long unbranched poly-
mer chains, formed by stringing together monomeric building blocks (subunits)
drawn from a standard repertoire that is the same for all living cells. Like DNA and
RNA, proteins carry information in the form of a linear sequence of subunits in
the same way as a human message written in an alphabetic script. There are many
different protein molecules in each cell, and—if we ignore water molecules—they
form the major portion of the cell’s mass.
   The subunits of proteins are the amino acids, which are quite different from
the nucleotides of DNA and RNA, and there are 20 types instead of 4. Each amino
acid is built around a core structure that allows it to be covalently linked in a
standard way to any other amino acid in the set; attached to this core is a side
group of atoms that gives each amino acid a distinctive chemical character. Each
protein molecule is a polypeptide chain that is created by joining its amino acids
in a particular sequence; this sequence determines how the polypeptide folds
up, giving the protein its unique three-dimensional structure. Through several
billion years of evolution, these sequences have been selected to give each protein a
useful function.
   By folding into a precise structure that binds with high specificity to other
molecules, each protein performs a specific function according to its genetically
specified sequence of amino acids. Proteins form and maintain diverse cell and
extracellular structures, generate movements, sense signals, and so on. Many
have reactive sites on their surface, allowing them to act as enzymes that cata-
lyze reactions that make or break specific covalent bonds. Proteins, above all,
are the main molecules that put the cell’s genetic information into action. Thus,
polynucleotides (DNA and mRNAs) specify the amino acid sequences of proteins.
Proteins, in turn, serve as catalysts to cause many different chemical reactions to
occur, including those that synthesize new DNA and RNA molecules.
   In everyday speech, a catalyst refers to “any agent that provokes or speeds sig-     Figure 1–5 Life as an autocatalytic
                                                                                           process. (A) The living cell is a self-
nificant change or action.” But in chemistry, the term catalyst is defined more                                                                                                                 replicating collection of catalysts. (B) Life
narrowly, being applied to any molecule that speeds up a specific chemical reac-    can be viewed as an autocatalytic process.
tion without itself being changed. From the most fundamental point of view, a   DNA and RNA molecules provide the
living cell is a self-replicating collection of catalysts that takes in food, processes     nucleotide sequence information (green
this food to provide both the building blocks and energy needed to make more     arrows) that is used both to produce
                                                                                                        proteins and to copy themselves. Proteins,
catalysts, and discards the materials left over as waste (Figure 1–5A). Together,                                                                                                                             in turn, provide the catalytic activity (red
these feedback loops that connect proteins and polynucleotides form the basis for     arrows) needed to synthesize DNA, RNA,
this autocatalytic, self-reproducing behavior of all living organisms (Figure 1–5B).    and proteins themselves. Together, these
                                                                                          feedback loops create the self-replicating
                                                                                        system that endows cells with the ability to
All Cells Translate RNA into Protein in the Same Way                        reproduce. Although the great majority of
                                                                                                    the catalysts in the cell are proteins (known
How the information in DNA specifies the production of proteins was a complete                                                                                          as enzymes), a few RNA molecules (known
mystery in the 1950s when the double-strand structure of DNA was first revealed     as ribozymes) also have this property, as
as the basis of heredity. But in subsequent years, scientists discovered the elegant    we will see in Chapter 6.



(A)  FOOD IN     WASTE OUT                          (B)



                               building                                                                SEQUENCE
                                 blocks                                                                INFORMATION
                                                             DNA and RNA
                             energy                 nucleotides


                                                           CATALYTIC                           cell's collection
                                                              ACTIVITY                    of catalysts
                                                                                                  proteins                                                                                                           amino acids

       CELL'S COLLECTION OF CATALYSTS
     COLLABORATE TO REPRODUCE THE
         ENTIRE COLLECTION BEFORE
           A CELL DIVIDES

=== Original PDF page 46 ===
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH                                                    7


mechanisms involved. The translation of genetic information from the 4-letter
alphabet of polynucleotides into the 20-letter alphabet of proteins is a complex
process. The rules of this translation seem in some respects neat and rational but
in other respects strangely arbitrary, given that they are (with minor exceptions)
identical in all living things. These arbitrary features, it is thought, reflect frozen
accidents in the early history of life. They stem from the chance properties of the
earliest organisms that were passed on by heredity and have become so deeply
embedded in the constitution of all living cells that they cannot be changed
without disastrous consequences.
     It turns out that the information in the sequence of a messenger RNA (mRNA)
molecule is read out in groups of three nucleotides at a time: each triplet of
nucleotides, or codon, specifies (codes for, or encodes) a single amino acid in a
corresponding protein. Because the number of distinct triplets that can be formed
from four nucleotides is 43, there are 64 possible codons, all of which occur in
nature. However, there are only 20 naturally occurring amino acids, which means
there are necessarily many cases in which several codons correspond to the same
amino acid. This genetic code is read out by a special class of small RNA molecules,
called transfer RNAs (tRNAs). Each type of tRNA becomes attached at one end to
a specific amino acid and displays at its other end a specific sequence of three
nucleotides—an anticodon—that enables it to recognize, through base-pairing,
a particular codon or subset of codons in mRNA. The intricate chemistry that
enables these tRNAs to translate a specific sequence of A, C, G, and U nucleo-
tides in an mRNA molecule into a specific sequence of amino acids in a protein
molecule occurs on a ribosome, a large multimolecular machine composed of
both protein and ribosomal RNA. All of these processes will be described in detail
in Chapter 6.

Each Protein Is Encoded by a Specific Gene

DNA molecules as a rule are very large, containing the specifications for thou-
sands of proteins and RNA molecules. Special sequences in the DNA serve as
punctuation, defining where the information for each RNA and protein begins
and ends. And individual segments of the long DNA sequence are transcribed
into separate mRNA molecules, coding for different proteins. Each such DNA
segment represents one gene. As previously mentioned, some DNA segments—a
smaller number—are transcribed into RNA molecules that are not translated into
protein but have other functions in the cell; such DNA segments also count as
genes. A gene therefore is defined as the segment of DNA sequence correspond-
ing either to a single protein (but sometimes to a set of closely related, alternative
protein variants) or to a single catalytic, regulatory, or structural RNA molecule.
   In all cells, the expression of individual genes is regulated: instead of manu-
facturing its full repertoire of possible proteins and RNAs at full tilt all the time,
the cell adjusts the rate of transcription and translation of different genes inde-
pendently, according to need. As we shall see in Chapter 7, stretches of regulatory
DNA are interspersed among the segments that code for protein, and these
noncoding regions bind to special protein molecules that control the rate of
transcription of individual genes. The organization of this regulatory DNA varies
widely from one class of organisms to another, but the basic strategy is univer-
sal. In this way, the genome of the cell dictates not only the nature of the cell’s
proteins but also when and where they are to be made.

Life Requires a Continual Input of Free Energy

A living cell is a dynamic chemical system, operating far from chemical equilib-
rium. For a cell to grow or to make a new cell in its own image, it must take in
free energy from the environment, as well as raw materials, to drive the neces-
sary synthetic reactions. This consumption of free energy is fundamental to life.
When this energy is not available, a cell decays toward chemical equilibrium and
soon dies.

=== Original PDF page 47 ===
8      Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


   As one example, free energy is required for the propagation of genetic infor-
mation. Picture the molecules in a cell as a swarm of objects endowed with
thermal energy, moving around violently at random, buffeted by collisions with
one another. To copy genetic information—in the form of a DNA sequence, for
example—nucleotide molecules from this wild crowd must be captured, arranged
in a specific order defined by a preexisting template, and linked together in a
fixed relationship. The bonds that hold the nucleotides in their proper places on
the template and join them together must be strong enough to resist the disor-
dering effect of thermal motion, which we describe shortly. The joining process
is driven forward by a consumption of free energy, which is needed to ensure that
the correct bonds are made, and made robustly. As an analogy, the molecules
might be compared with spring-loaded traps, ready to snap into a more stable,
lower-energy attached state when they meet their proper partners. As they snap
together into the bonded arrangement, their available stored energy—their free
energy—like the energy of the spring in the trap, is released and dissipated as
heat. In a cell, the chemical processes underlying information transfer are more
complex, but the same basic principle applies: free energy must be spent for the
creation of order.
   To replicate its genetic information faithfully, and indeed to make all its com-
plex molecules according to the correct specifications, the cell therefore requires
free energy, which has to be imported somehow from the surroundings. As we will
discuss in detail in Chapter 2, the free energy required by animal cells is derived
                                                                                                                         hydrophilic
from chemical bonds in food molecules that the animals eat, whereas plants get              head
their free energy from sunlight.                                                                        hydrophobic
                                                                                                                                                        tails
                                                                                                              (A)
All Cells Function as Biochemical Factories
                                                                                                                phospholipid
Because all cells make DNA, RNA, and protein, they all have to contain and               monolayer
manipulate a similar collection of small organic (carbon-containing) molecules,
including simple sugars, nucleotides, and amino acids, as well as other substances
that are universally required. All cells, for example, require the phosphorylated                OIL
nucleotide ATP (adenosine triphosphate), not only as a building block for the syn-
thesis of DNA and RNA but also as a carrier of the free energy that is needed to
drive a huge number of chemical reactions in the cell.
   Although all cells function as biochemical factories of a broadly similar type,
many of the details of their small-molecule transactions differ. Plants, for exam-
ple, require only the simplest of nutrients because they harness the energy of
sunlight to make all their own small organic molecules. Other organisms, such
                                                                                                                                  phospholipid
as animals and some bacteria, feed on living (or once living) organisms and                                      bilayer forming
must obtain many of their organic molecules ready-made. We return to this                               a vesicle
point later in the chapter.

All Cells Are Enclosed in a Plasma Membrane Across Which                  WATER
Nutrients and Waste Materials Must Pass
Each living cell is enclosed by a membrane—the plasma membrane. This mem-     (B)
brane acts as a selective barrier that enables the cell to concentrate nutrients                                                                                             Figure 1–6 Behavior of phospholipid
gathered from its environment and retain the products it synthesizes for its own    molecules in water. (A) A phospholipid
use, while excreting its waste products. Without a plasma membrane, the cell     molecule is amphiphilic, having a
could not maintain its integrity as a coordinated chemical system.                        hydrophilic (water-loving) phosphate
   The molecules that form cell membranes have the simple physicochemical    head group and a hydrophobic (water-
                                                                                                          avoiding) hydrocarbon tail. (B) At
property of being amphiphilic; that is, they consist of one part that is hydrophilic                                                                                     an interface between oil and water,
(water-soluble) and another part that is hydrophobic (water-insoluble). Such     phospholipids arrange themselves as a
molecules placed in water aggregate spontaneously, arranging their hydropho-     single sheet (a monolayer), with their
bic portions to be as much in contact with one another as possible to hide them    head groups facing the water and their
from the water, while keeping their hydrophilic portions exposed. Amphiphilic        tail groups facing the oil. When immersed
                                                                                                                             in water, however, phospholipids
molecules of appropriate shape, such as the phospholipid molecules that com-                                                                                             aggregate to form lipid bilayers that fold
pose most of the molecules of the plasma membrane, spontaneously aggregate in      in on themselves to form sealed aqueous
water to create a bilayer that forms small closed vesicles (Figure 1–6).                compartments known as vesicles.

=== Original PDF page 48 ===
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH                                                    9


   Although the chemical details vary, the hydrophobic tails of the predominant
lipid molecules in all cells are hydrocarbon polymers (–CH2–CH2–CH2–), and
their spontaneous assembly into a lipid bilayer is but one of many examples of an
important general principle: cells produce molecules whose chemical properties
cause them to self-assemble into the structures that a cell needs.
   The cell boundary cannot be totally impermeable. If a cell is to grow and
reproduce, it must be able to import raw materials and export waste across its
plasma membrane. All cells therefore have specialized proteins embedded in
their plasma membrane that transport specific molecules from one side to the
other. Some of these membrane transport proteins, like some of the proteins that
catalyze the fundamental small-molecule reactions inside the cell, have been
so well conserved over the course of evolution that we can recognize the fam-
ily resemblances between them when even the most distantly related organisms
are compared.
   The transport proteins in the plasma membrane largely determine which
molecules enter the cell, while the catalytic proteins (enzymes) inside the cell
determine the reactions that the entering molecules undergo. Thus, by specifying
the RNAs and proteins that the cell produces, the genetic information recorded
in the DNA sequence dictates the entire chemistry of the cell—in fact, not only its
chemistry but also its form and its behavior, for these too are chiefly determined
and controlled by the cell’s proteins.

Cells Operate at a Microscopic Scale Dominated by Random
Thermal Motion

Thus far we have described the cell as a self-replicating, membrane-bound bag
of chemicals and macromolecules; but, as the unit of life, the cell is much more
than the sum of its parts. Although not obvious from microscopy images, even
the simplest cell is highly ordered internally: its individual components must
self-assemble and become highly organized for the cell to function. And the cell
contents are in perpetual motion. The most obvious movements are catalyzed by
motor proteins, enzymes that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis for a wide variety
of purposes; these include pumping ions across the plasma membrane, translo-
cating large assemblies from one intracellular site to another, and propelling the
cell through its environment. In addition, and as previously mentioned, random
thermal motions of molecules (including water) are prominent at the scale of
cells—whose dimensions can be as small as a micrometer (10–6 meters) in diam-
eter. This type of spontaneous movement, called thermal or Brownian motion,
was first observed by Robert Brown in 1827, while looking through a microscope
at pollen grains immersed in water. Caused by random molecular collisions, the
constant fluctuating movement has important repercussions. Brownian motion
drives a process called diffusion, and it determines the rates of biochemical reac-
tions as molecules collide with one another within the interior of a cell (described
in Chapter 2; see Movie 2.4).
   Even though random, the cell can harness Brownian motion for its own
advantage. For example, during one step in the crawling migration of animal
cells, the plasma membrane at the leading edge extends forward (see Chapter 16).
This movement does not involve motor proteins. Instead, a cytoskeletal filament
(an actin polymer) polymerizes adjacent to the inner membrane surface. When
the membrane fluctuates in the forward direction, actin quickly fills in the gap
so that the membrane cannot slip back to its original position. This phenome-
non, in which random thermal motions are harnessed in a directed way, creates a
Brownian ratchet (Figure 1–7).
   Because an object at the micrometer scale is constantly buffeted by water mol-
ecules, its movement requires overcoming high viscous drag forces. As a result,
the directed movement of a complex of molecules inside the cell (by a motor pro-
tein, for example) will stop immediately when the motor disengages, leaving the
complex to be randomly buffeted by thermal motion. There is no “gliding” inside
the cell.

=== Original PDF page 49 ===
10     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


                                                                                             Figure 1–7 How membrane protrusion
                    plasma membrane                                                                          is driven by a simple Brownian ratchet.
                                                                       A single actin filament is shown abutting
                                                                                                    the plasma membrane, which is fluctuating
                                                                                     back and forth because of random thermal
                                                                                                 motions. When the membrane happens to
                                                                            move away from the end of the filament,
                                                                                                                                                                                           it creates sufficient space for an additional
                                                                                                         subunit, which quickly adds on. The
                                                                                                                             slightly longer filament acts as a ratchet
                                                                                   and prevents the membrane from moving
                                                                                     back to its original position. In a migrating
                                                                                                 animal cell, this Brownian ratchet process
                                                                                                          drives protrusion of the membrane and
                               actin                                                                                                       contributes to forward movement of                         ﬁlament
                                                                                                    the cell, as described in Chapter 16
                                                                                                      (see pp. 956–957).
A Living Cell Can Exist with 500 Genes

We have seen how genomes carry the information for all the proteins and RNA
molecules of a cell, and how, through catalysis, all the other building blocks of
the cell are made. But how complex are real living cells? In particular, what are
the minimum requirements of a living cell? One measure of complexity is based
on the total number of genes in an organism’s genome. A species that has one
of the smallest known genomes is the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium, which
causes a common, sexually transmitted, human disease (Figure 1–8). This organ-
ism lives as a parasite in mammals, where the environment provides it with many
of the small molecules it needs ready-made. Nevertheless, it still has to make all
the large molecules—DNA, RNAs, and proteins. It has 525 genes, most of which
are essential. Its genome of 580,070 nucleotide pairs represents 145,018 bytes of
information—about as much as it takes to record the text of one chapter of this
book. Cell biology may be complicated, but it is not unimaginably so.

Summary

The individual cell is the minimal self-reproducing unit of life. A cell consists of a
self-replicating collection of catalysts, enclosed in a plasma membrane. All cells
operate as biochemical factories, driven by the free energy released in a complicated
network of chemical reactions. Central to a cell’s ability to reproduce is the trans-
mission of its genetic information to its progeny cells when it divides. All cells store                                           0.2 µm
their genetic information in double-strand DNA, and the complete sequence of                                                                                             Figure 1–8 The small bacterium
DNA nucleotides for each organism is known as its genome. The cell replicates this    Mycoplasma genitalium. It is viewed
information by separating the paired DNA strands and using each as a template     here in cross section in an electron
for polymerization to make a new DNA strand with a complementary sequence of     microscope, which uses a beam of
nucleotide subunits. The same strategy of templated polymerization is used in the     electrons instead of light to create an
                                                                                      image with a resolution that is many times
transcription of portions of the DNA into molecules of the closely related polynu-     higher than that of an image viewed in a
cleotide polymer, RNA. Most of these RNA molecules are mRNAs that in turn guide     conventional light microscope. Of the
the synthesis of protein molecules by the process of translation. Proteins are poly-    525 genes this bacterium contains,
mers of amino acid subunits and are the catalysts for almost all the cell’s chemical    43 code for transfer RNAs, ribosomal
                                                                                  RNAs, and other nonprotein-codingreactions. They are also responsible for the selective import and export of molecules                                                                                  RNAs. Of the 482 protein-coding
across the plasma membrane that surrounds each cell. The specific shape and func-     genes, 154 are involved in replication,
tion of each protein depend on its amino acid sequence, which is specified by the      transcription, translation, and related
nucleotide sequence of a corresponding segment of the DNA—the gene that codes     processes involving DNA, RNA, and
for that protein. In this way, the DNA of the cell determines the cell’s chemistry,      protein; 98 are involved in the membrane
                                                                                   and surface structures of the cell; 46
which is fundamentally similar in all cells, reflecting their ultimate origin from a                                                                                                     are involved in the transport of nutrients
common ancestor cell that existed on Earth more than 3.5 billion years ago.           and other molecules across the plasma
                                                                                  membrane; and 71 are involved
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE            inandenergydegradationconversionof smalland molecules.the synthesis
                                                                                                  (Courtesy of Roger Cole, in Medical
The success of living organisms based on DNA, RNA, and protein has been spec-                                                                                                        Microbiology, 4th ed. [S. Baron, ed.].
tacular. Through its billions of years of proliferation, life has populated the oceans,     Galveston: University of Texas Medical
covered the land, penetrated deep into Earth’s crust, and molded the surface of     Branch, 1996.)

=== Original PDF page 50 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                11


our planet. Our oxygen-rich atmosphere, the deposits of coal and oil, the layers
of iron ores, the cliffs of chalk and limestone and marble—all these are products,
directly or indirectly, of past biological activity on Earth.
   Living things are not confined to the familiar temperate realm of land, water,
and sunlight inhabited by plants and animals. They are found in the darkest
depths of the ocean, in hot volcanic mud, in pools beneath the frozen surface
of the Antarctic, and buried kilometers deep in Earth’s crust. The creatures that
live in these extreme environments are generally unfamiliar, not only because
they are inaccessible, but also because they are mostly microscopic and cannot
be maintained in a laboratory. Even in more familiar habitats, most organisms
are too small for us to see without special equipment: they tend to go unnoticed,
unless they cause a disease or rot the timbers of our houses. Yet such microor-
ganisms (microbes) are by far the most numerous living organisms on our planet.
Only recently, through new methods of molecular analysis including rapid DNA
sequencing, have we begun to get a picture of life on Earth that is not grossly dis-
torted by our biased perspective as large animals living on dry land.
   In this section, we consider—in very broad terms—the diversity of organisms
on our planet and the relationships among them. Because the genetic informa-
tion for every organism is written in the universal language of DNA sequences,
and because the DNA sequence of any organism’s genome can be readily
determined, it is now possible to characterize, catalog, and compare any set of
living organisms with reference to these sequences. From such comparisons we
can specify the place of each organism in the family tree of living species—the
“tree of life.”

The Tree of Life Has Three Major Domains: Eukaryotes, Bacteria,
and Archaea

The classification of living things has traditionally depended on comparisons of
their outward appearances: we can see that a fish has eyes, jaws, backbone, brain,
and so on, just as humans do, and that a worm does not—just as we can see that a
rosebush is more similar to an apple tree than to grass. As Darwin showed, we can
readily interpret such close family resemblances in terms of an evolution from
common ancestors, and we can find the remains of many of these ancestors pre-
served in the fossil record. In this way, it became possible to draw a family tree of
living organisms, showing the various lines of descent, as well as branch points in
evolutionary history, where the ancestors of one group of species became differ-
ent from those of another.
  When the disparities between organisms become very great, however, these
methods begin to fail. How do we decide whether a fungus is more closely related
to a plant or to an animal? When it comes to microscopic organisms such as
bacteria, the task becomes harder still: one tiny rod or sphere can look much
like another. Moreover, much of our knowledge of the microbial world was tra-
ditionally restricted to those species that can be isolated and cultured in the
laboratory. But direct DNA sequencing of populations of microbes in their natural
habitats—such as soil, ocean water, or even the human mouth—has taught us
that the vast majority of microbes cannot be easily cultured in the laboratory.
Often, they thrive in the wild as components of complex ecosystems and—when
separated from their natural surroundings—cannot survive. Until modern DNA
sequencing was developed, these organisms were largely unknown to us, espe-
cially those that inhabit extreme environments such as the deep Earth’s crust or
seawater miles below the ocean surface.
  Genome analysis has now provided us with a simple, direct, and powerful
way to determine evolutionary relationships. The complete DNA sequence of an
organism defines its nature with almost perfect precision and in exhaustive detail.
Moreover, this specification is in a digital form—a string of letters—that can be
entered into a computer and compared with the corresponding information for
any other organism. Because DNA is subject to random changes that accumu-
late over long periods of time (as we will see shortly), the number of differences

=== Original PDF page 51 ===
12     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


between the DNA sequences of two organisms can provide a direct, objective,
and quantitative indication of the evolutionary distance between them.
   For constructing a comprehensive tree of life, it is necessary to begin with a
segment of DNA that is easily recognized in the genomes of all organisms. We
discussed earlier how all cells use the same fundamental mechanism to translate
a nucleotide sequence into a protein sequence, and we saw that the ribosome is
the “decoding machine” that carries this out. Ribosomes are fundamentally simi­
lar in all organisms, and an especially well-conserved component of them is the
RNA molecules that make up their core. Although the exact sequence of these
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) differs across organisms, they are similar enough to use
them as a ruler to judge how closely two species are related: the more similar
the ribosomal RNA sequences, the more recently the two species diverged from
a common ancestor and the more related they must be. Once a rough approxi­
mation of the tree of life has been obtained in this way, many additional DNA
sequences in genomes—those that might not be identifiable in all organisms—
can accurately determine relationships among more closely related species.
   This approach has revealed that the living world consists of three major divi-
sions, or domains: eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea, as illustrated in Figure 1–9;
in the following paragraphs, we briefly introduce each in turn.

                                                 Spirochetes   Rickettsia                E. coli
                                                                                 Salmonella
                                                                            Neisseria      Yersinia
                                                                                        Vibrio
                                                                              Beggiatoa

           PVC superphylum
               (includes
             Chlamydia)




                                                                              Proteobacteria
Actinobacteria
(includes
Streptomyces)


        Chloroﬂexi
                                                                   based largely on genome
                                                                   sequencing of environmental
                                                                             samples


     Firmicutes
      (includes Clostridium,
     Streptococcus,                                                                                    ARCHAEA
     Staphylococcus,
    and Listeria)
                 Cyanobacteria                                                          Asgard
                 (includes Anabaena
              and Phormidium)


                                                                                                                                animals and
                                                                                                                                     fungi
                                                                                  EUKARYOTES

                                                                                                                              plants


                                   BACTERIA

Figure 1–9 A global tree of life, based on genome comparisons, shows the three major divisions (domains) of the living world. The lengths
of the branches are proportional to differences among genomes using common genes that can be recognized and compared across many different
species. Some of the organisms discussed in this and later chapters are indicated. Of the three domains of life (bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes),
bacteria encompass by far the greatest diversity, commensurate with their ability to colonize nearly every ecological niche on the planet. So many
new bacterial species are currently being identified through DNA sequencing of environmental samples that simply naming them has become a
challenge. Although eukaryotes (and especially animals) are the main focus of this book, they comprise only a small slice of the global diversity. An
expanded eukaryotic tree is shown in Figure 1–35, and an expanded tree of mammals is given in Figure 4–67. (Adapted from C.J. Castelle and J.F.
Banfield, Cell 172:1181–1197, 2018.)

=== Original PDF page 52 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                13

Eukaryotes Make Up the Domain of Life That Is Most
Familiar to Us

The great variety of living creatures that we see around us are eukaryotes. The
name is from the Greek, meaning “truly nucleated” (from the words eu, “well”
or “truly,” and karyon, “kernel” or “nucleus”), reflecting the fact that the cells of
these organisms have their DNA enclosed in a membrane-bound organelle called
the nucleus. Visible by simple light microscopy, this feature was used in the early
twentieth century to classify living organisms as either eukaryotes (those with a
nucleus) or prokaryotes (those without a nucleus). We now know that prokary-
otes comprise two of the three major domains of life, the bacteria and archaea.
Eukaryotic cells are typically much larger than those of bacteria and archaea;
in addition to a nucleus, they typically contain a variety of membrane-bound
organelles that are also lacking in the prokaryotes. The genomes of eukaryotes
also tend to run much larger—containing more than 20,000 genes for humans
and corals, for example, compared with 4000–6000 genes for the typical bacteria
or archaea.
   In addition to plants and animals, the eukaryotes include fungi (such as mush-
rooms or the yeasts used in beer- and bread-making), as well as an astonishing
variety of single-celled, microscopic forms of life. Most of this book is focused
on the cell biology of eukaryotic organisms (especially animals); in the final sec-
tions of this chapter, we shall return to eukaryotes and focus on the variety within
this group.

On the Basis of Genome Analysis, Bacteria Are the Most Diverse
Group of Organisms on the Planet

When modern trees of life were constructed using genome information, one of
the big surprises was how much more evolutionarily diverse the bacterial world
is compared with the eukaryotes; we now know that this great diversity reflects
the much earlier appearance of bacteria in the evolutionary history of the planet.
Bacteria are usually very small (and invisible to the unaided eye), and they gener-
ally live as independent individuals or in loosely organized communities, rather
than as multicellular organisms. They are typically spherical or rod-shaped and
measure a few micrometers (μm) in linear dimension (Figure 1–10). They often
have a tough protective coat, called a cell wall, beneath which a plasma mem-
brane encloses a single cytoplasmic compartment—the cytoplasm—containing
DNA, RNA, proteins, and the many small molecules needed for life (Figure 1–11).
Although difficult to discern in the light microscope, the interior of a bacterium is
nevertheless highly organized, a topic we discuss in Chapter 16.
   Commensurate with the diversity of their genomes, bacteria live in an enor-
mous variety of ecological niches, and they are astonishingly varied in their





                                                                              2 µm


    spherical           rod-shaped cells,        the smallest                 spiral cells,
    cells, e.g.,            e.g., Escherichia coli,           cells, e.g.,          e.g., Treponema pallidum
 Streptococcus            Salmonella          Mycoplasma,
                                              Spiroplasma

Figure 1–10 Shapes and sizes of some bacteria. Although most are small, as shown, measuring
a few micrometers in linear dimension, there are also some giant species. An extreme example is
the cigar-shaped bacterium Epulopiscium fishelsoni, which lives in the gut of a surgeonfish and can
be up to 600 μm long (not shown).

=== Original PDF page 53 ===
14     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


           (A)                                                                                 Figure 1–11 Bacterial structure. (A) A
                                                           ﬂagellum                         drawing of the bacterium Vibrio cholerae,
                                                                                        showing its simple internal organization.
         1 µm                                                                                        This species can infect the human small
                                                                                                                  intestine to cause cholera; the severe
                                                                                                       diarrhea that accompanies this disease
                                                   ribosomes in cytosol                                           kills more than 100,000 people a year
                                                                                                worldwide. Like many other bacteria, Vibrio
                 cell   plasma   DNA   outer      cytoplasm                                      has a helical appendage at one end—a
              wall  membrane      membrane                                                                                                  flagellum—that rotates as a propeller to
            (B)                                                                                                drive the cell forward. (B) An electron
                                                                                            micrograph of a longitudinal section
                                                                                               through the widely studied bacterium
                                                                                                     Escherichia coli (E. coli). E. coli is part of our
                                                                                            normal intestinal microbiota, the complete
                                                                                                               collection of microbes in our gut. It has
                                                                             many flagella distributed over its surface,
                                                                                                but they are not visible in this section.
                                                                                        Both of the bacteria shown here are Gram
                                                                                                         negative, having both an outer and an
                                                                                                            inner (plasma) membrane. However, many
                                                           1 µm                                   bacterial species lack the outer membrane;
                                                                                                these are classified as Gram positive.
                                                                                                                  (B, courtesy of E. Kellenberger.)

biochemical capabilities. There exist species that can utilize virtually any type
of organic molecule as food, ranging from sugars and amino acids to hydrocar-
bons, including the simplest hydrocarbon, methane gas (CH4). Other species
(Figure 1–12) harvest light energy in a variety of ways; some, like plants, carry out
photosynthesis and generate oxygen as a by-product. Still others can feed on a
plain diet of inorganic nutrients, getting their carbon from CO2, and relying on a
host of other chemicals that occur in the environment to fuel their energy needs—
including H2, Fe2+, H2S, and elemental sulfur (Figure 1–13).
  A wide range of bacteria directly affect human health. The bubonic plague of
the Middle Ages (estimated to have killed half the population of Europe) and the
current tuberculosis pandemic (more than a million deaths a year) are each due to
a specific species of bacteria. And thousands of different bacterial species reside
in our gut and on our skin, where they are often beneficial to us. We shall dis-
cuss bacteria throughout the book, as it is the study of these relatively simple cells
that led to much of our understanding of basic biological processes—including
DNA replication, transcription, and translation. We focus again on bacteria in
Chapter 24 when we examine the cell biology of infectious disease. Finally, genetic





                               H       S
                                                      V                                                                                             Figure 1–12 Photosynthetic bacteria.
                                                                                                                         (A) A light micrograph of the bacterium
                                                                                   Anabaena cylindrica. Its cells form long
                                                                                                       chains, in which most of the cells (labeled
                                                                                                            V) perform photosynthesis (and thereby
   (A)                                                                                           capture CO2 and incorporate C into organic
                                                                             10 µm          compounds); others (labeled H) become
                                                                                                         specialized for fixing N from N2; and still
                                                                                                    others (labeled S) develop into spores,
                                                                                         which can resist unfavorable conditions.
                                                                                                                     (B) An electron micrograph of a related
                                                                                                   photosynthetic bacterium, Phormidium
                                                                                           laminosum, which shows the intracellular
                                                                               membranes where photosynthesis occurs.
                                                                                 As shown in these micrographs, some
                                                                                                  prokaryotes have intracellular membranes
                                                                                   and form colonies that resemble simple
                                                                                                                     multicellular organisms. (A, courtesy of
   (B)                                                                                        David Adams; B, courtesy of D.P. Hill and
                                                                          1 µm               C.J. Howe.)

=== Original PDF page 54 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                15


engineering techniques allow bacteria to be put to use as small “factories” to pro-
duce human pharmaceuticals, biofuels, and other high-value chemical products,
as we discuss in Chapter 8.

Archaea: The Most Mysterious Domain of Life

Of the three domains of life, archaea remains the most poorly understood. Most
of its members have been identified only by DNA sequencing of samples from
the environment, and relatively few have been cultured and studied up close
in the laboratory. Like bacteria, the archaea we know most about are small and
lack the internal, membrane-bound organelles that distinguish the eukaryotes.
But they differ from bacteria in many ways, including the chemistry of their cell
walls, the kinds of lipids that make up their membrane, and the range of bio-
chemical reactions that they can carry out. Another surprising conclusion came
from genome comparisons: although archaea resemble bacteria in their outward
appearances, their genomes are much more closely related to eukaryotes than to
bacteria (see Figure 1–9). It has even been proposed that the tree of life should be
considered to have only two principal domains, with the archaea and eukaryotes                                    6 µm
making up one domain and bacteria constituting the other. The close relationship
of archaea and eukaryotes has also changed our views on how the earliest eukary-     Figure 1–13 The bacterium Beggiatoa.
                                                                                                                                                                              It lives in sulfurous environments (forotic cell evolved, a topic addressed later in this chapter.                                                                                            example, see Figure 1–15) and gets its
    At first it was thought that archaea occupied only extreme environments such     energy by oxidizing H2S; it can fix carbon
as volcanoes, salt lakes, acid hot springs, and the stomachs of cattle, but they are    even in the dark. Note the yellow deposits
now recognized to be present also in more congenial surroundings such as soils,      of sulfur inside the cells. (Courtesy of Ralph
seawater, and our skin. Commensurate with the wide variety of ecological niches     S. Wolfe.)
in which they have been found, different species of archaea have highly diverse
chemistries. They are believed to be the predominant life-form in soil and seawa-
ter, and they play major roles in recycling nitrogen and carbon, two of the most
important elements for all cells.

Organisms Occupy Most of Our Planet

To understand life on Earth, we need to understand more than its diversity;
we also need to know where life is found on our planet and how various living
species are distributed. Organisms inhabit nearly all of the planet, and we con-
tinue to discover new habitats. Amazingly, some bacteria and archaea even live              archaea                                                                                                      7 Gt C
miles down in Earth’s deep crust and in the deepest and most hostile parts of
the oceans.                                                                                                                        viruses
  How are the main groups of organisms distributed among different envi-        0.2 Gt C
ronments? DNA sequencing and other advanced technologies have been used                               plants
recently to address this question. The total biomass on Earth is estimated to con-                         450 Gt C
tain ∼550 gigatons (1015 grams) of carbon, of which 450 gigatons of carbon (Gt C)
is plants, 70 Gt C is bacteria, 7 Gt C is archaea, and 2 Gt C is animals (Figure 1–14).        bacteria70 Gt C
The plants are mainly terrestrial; the bacteria and archaea are mainly in the soil
and Earth’s crust. Total terrestrial biomass is 100 times greater than that in the
oceans, although most of the animal mass is found in the oceans. The human                  protists     fungi      animals
                                                                                                      4 Gt C     12 Gt C     2 Gt C
biomass is 10 times greater than that of all measurable wild animals together,
and—while human biomass continues to increase—that of wild animals is fall­     Figure 1–14 The distribution of living
ing, largely as a result of human activities.                                         biomass on Earth. The total biomass on
   Although humans and other animals make up a small fraction of Earth’s     Earth expressed as gigatons of carbon
                                                                                                          (Gt C) is estimated to be ∼550 Gt C. Inbiomass, their existence depends completely on other forms of life. In the next                                                                                                    the graph shown, the area of each taxon
section, we shall see some of the ways that these different life-forms work together     represented is proportional to the taxon’s
to capture and recycle energy from Earth’s inanimate features.                            global biomass, so plants account for
                                                                                           about 80% (450/550) of the total biomass,
Cells Can Be Powered by a Wide Variety of Free-Energy Sources      whereas animals account for 0.4% (2/550).                                                                                      These recent estimates are based on
Organisms obtain the free energy needed for life in different ways. Some—such     various advanced techniques, including
                                                                   DNA sequencing and remote sensing.
as animals, fungi, and the many different bacteria that live in the human gut—                                                                                            (Adapted from Y.M. Bar-On et al., Proc.
get it by feeding on other living things or the organic chemicals they produce;      Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115:6506–6511,
such organisms are called organotrophic (from the Greek word trophe, meaning    2018. With permission from the authors.)

=== Original PDF page 55 ===
16     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


“food”). Others derive their free energy directly from the nonliving world. These
primary energy converters fall into two classes: those that harvest the energy of
sunlight, and those that capture their energy from energy-rich systems of inor-
ganic chemicals in the environment (chemical systems that are far from chemical
equilibrium). Organisms of the former class are called phototrophic (feeding on
sunlight); those of the latter are called lithotrophic (feeding on rock). The organo-
trophic organisms like ourselves could not exist without these primary energy
converters, which are the most plentiful form of life.
   The phototrophic organisms include many types of bacteria, as well as algae
and plants, on which we—and virtually all the living things that we ordinarily see
around us—depend. Phototrophic organisms have changed the whole chemistry
of our environment: as a prime example, the oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere is a
by-product of their biosynthetic activities.
   Lithotrophic organisms are not such an obvious feature of our world,
because they are microscopic and mostly live in habitats that humans do not
frequent—deep in the ocean, buried in Earth’s crust, or in various other seem-
ingly inhospitable environments. But they are a major part of the living world, and
they are especially important in any consideration of the history of life on Earth.
  Some lithotrophs get energy from aerobic reactions, which use molecular oxy-
gen from the environment; because atmospheric O2 is ultimately the product of
living phototrophic organisms, these aerobic lithotrophs are, in a sense, feeding
on the products of past life. There are, however, many other lithotrophs that live
anaerobically, in places where little or no molecular oxygen is present; these are
circumstances similar to those that existed in the early days of life on Earth, before
oxygen had accumulated.
   The most dramatic of the anaerobic sites are the hot hydrothermal vents on
the floor of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. They are located where the ocean
floor is spreading as new portions of Earth’s crust form by a gradual upwelling
of material from Earth’s interior (Figure 1–15). Downward-percolating seawater
is heated and driven back upward as a submarine geyser, carrying with it a cur-
rent of chemicals from the hot rocks below. A typical cocktail might include H2S,
H2, CO, Mn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, CH4, NH4+, and phosphorus-containing compounds.




                     SEA
                                                       dark cloud of
                                                             hot, mineral-rich
                                                     water

                                                   hydrothermal
                       anaerobic lithotrophic                                                     vent
                         bacteria

                        invertebrate                  chimney made from                                                                                             Figure 1–15 The geology of a hot                      animal community               precipitated metal
                                                                                        hydrothermal vent in the ocean floor.                                                       sulﬁdes
                                                                                 As indicated, seawater percolates down
                        2–3°C                                                               toward the hot, molten, volcanic rock
                                                                                                     upwelling (basalt) from Earth’s interior
                                                                                   and is heated and driven back upward,
                                                                                                          carrying a mixture of minerals leached
                             seaﬂoor                                                          from the hot rock. A temperature gradient
                                                                                                                                       is set up, from more than 350°C near the
                                                                                               core of the vent, down to 2–3°C in the
                                                       350°C                                    surrounding ocean. Minerals precipitate
                        percolation                         core                                    from the water as it cools, forming a
                       of seawater                                                                chimney. Different classes of organisms,
                                                                                                                     thriving at different temperatures, live in
                                                                                                                      different neighborhoods of the chimney. A
                                   hot mineral solution                                                   typical chimney might be a few meters tall,
                                                                                        spewing out hot, mineral-rich water. The
                                                                                                          locations of lithotrophic bacteria and the
                                        hot basalt                                                     invertebrate marine animals that depend on
                                                                                  them are also shown (see Figure 1–16).

=== Original PDF page 56 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                17


                                    geochemical energy and                                      Figure 1–16 Organisms living at a depth
                                       inorganic raw materials                                         of 2500 meters near a vent in the ocean
                                                                                                                       floor. Close to the vent, at temperatures
                                                                                 up to about 120°C, various lithotrophic
                                                                                                species of bacteria and archaea live,
                                          bacteria and archaea                                                  directly fueled by geochemical energy. A
                                                                                                                                                                  little further away, where the temperature
                                                                                                                                       is lower, various invertebrate animals live
                                                                                       by feeding on these microorganisms. Most
                                   multicellular animals, e.g., tube worms                                                                                              remarkable are the giant (2-meter-long)
                                                                                              tube worms, Riftia pachyptila, which are
                                                                               shown in the photograph. Rather than feed
                                                                                  on the lithotrophic microbes, these worms
                                                                                                                                     live in symbiosis with them: specialized
                                                                                           organs in the worms harbor huge numbers
                                                                                                               of symbiotic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, which
                                                                                             harness geochemical energy and supply
                                                                                             nourishment to their hosts, which have
                                                                                  no mouth, gut, or anus. The tube worms
                                                                                                     are thought to have evolved from more
                                                                                                    conventional animals and to have become
                                                                                                      secondarily adapted to life at hydrothermal
                                                                                                         vents. (Science History Images/Alamy
                                                                                          Stock Photo.)





                                                              1 m


A dense population of microorganisms lives in the neighborhood of the vent,
thriving on this austere diet and harvesting free energy from reactions between
the available chemicals. Various invertebrate marine animals—clams, mussels,
and giant marine worms—in turn, live off the microbes at the vent, forming an
entire ecosystem analogous to the world of plants and animals that we belong to,
but one powered by geochemical energy instead of light (Figure 1–16).

Some Cells Fix Nitrogen and Carbon Dioxide for Other Cells

To make a living cell requires matter, as well as free energy. DNA, RNA, and pro-
tein are composed of just six elements: hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur,
and phosphorus. These are all plentiful in the nonliving environment, in Earth’s
rocks, water, and atmosphere. But they are not present in chemical forms that
allow easy incorporation into biological molecules. Atmospheric N2 and CO2, in
particular, are extremely unreactive. A large amount of free energy is required to
drive the reactions that use these inorganic molecules to make the organic com-
pounds needed for further biosynthesis; that is, to fix nitrogen and carbon dioxide,
so as to make N and C available to living organisms. Many types of cells lack the
biochemical machinery to achieve this fixation; they instead rely on other classes
of cells to do the job for them. We animals depend on plants, directly or indirectly,
for our supplies of carbon- and nitrogen-containing organic compounds. Plants
in turn, although they can fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, lack the abil-
ity to fix atmospheric nitrogen; they depend in part on nitrogen-fixing bacteria
to supply their need for nitrogen-containing organic compounds. Plants of the
pea family, for example, harbor symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria in nodules in
their roots.
   Because living cells can differ widely in some of the most basic aspects of
their biochemistry, cells with complementary needs and capabilities have fre-
quently developed close associations. Some of these symbiotic associations, as
we will see later, have evolved to the point where the partners have lost their
separate identities altogether: they have joined forces to form a single composite
cell—an endosymbiotic association, as opposed to an ectosymbiotic one between
separate organisms.

=== Original PDF page 57 ===
18     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life

Genomes Diversify Over Evolutionary Time, Producing New Types
of Organisms

Having discussed our current views on the diversity of life-forms, how they are
distributed across Earth, and how they depend on one another, we now turn to
the question of how this great diversity was generated. All life depends on the
storage of genetic information in the form of each organism’s DNA genome, so
our focus is on how genomes change over evolutionary time.
   In storing and copying genetic information, random accidents and errors
occur, altering the nucleotide sequence; that is, creating mutations. Therefore,
when a cell divides, the genomes of its two daughters are often not quite identical
to each other or to that of the parent cell. On rare occasions, the error may repre-
sent a change for the better; more probably, it will cause no significant difference
in the cell’s prospects. But in some cases, the error will cause serious damage; for
example, by disrupting the coding sequence for a key protein or RNA molecule.
Changes due to mistakes of the first type will tend to be perpetuated, because
the altered cell has an increased likelihood of surviving and reproducing itself.
Changes due to mistakes of the second type—neutral changes—may be perpet-
uated or not: in the competition for limited resources, it is a matter of chance
whether the altered cell or its cousins will succeed. But changes that cause seri-
ous damage lead nowhere: the cell that suffers them dies, leaving no progeny.
Through endless repetition of this cycle of error and trial—of mutation and nat-
ural selection—organisms evolve: their genetic specifications change, sometimes
giving organisms new ways to exploit the environment more effectively, to survive
in competition with others, and to reproduce successfully.
  Some parts of the genome will change more readily than others in the course
of evolution. A segment of DNA that does not code for protein or RNA and has no
significant regulatory role is free to change at a rate limited only by the frequency
of random errors. In contrast, a gene that codes for a highly optimized, essential
protein or RNA molecule cannot alter so easily: when mistakes occur, the faulty
cells are almost always disabled and eliminated. Genes of this latter sort are there-
fore highly conserved. Through 3.5 billion years or more of evolutionary history,
many DNA sequences have changed beyond all recognition, but the most highly
conserved genes remain perfectly recognizable in all living species.
   These latter genes are the ones we must examine if we wish to trace family
relationships between the most distantly related organisms in the tree of life.
We discussed an example of one such gene—that for ribosomal RNA—when we
introduced the classification of the living world into the three domains of eukary-
otes, bacteria, and archaea. Because the production of proteins is fundamental to
all living cells, this component of the ribosome has been highly conserved since
early in the history of life on Earth (Figure 1–17).
   The ribosomal RNA genes are exceptional in being so well conserved, whereas
most parts of genomes have diversified much more dramatically over evolutionary
time. A complete DNA sequence for an organism—its genome sequence—reveals
all the genes that an organism possesses, as well as those it lacks. When we


GTTCCGGGGGGAGTATGGTTGCAAAGCTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGACGGAAGGGCACCACCAGGAGTGGAGCCTGCGGCTTAATTTGACTCAACACGGGAAACCTCACCC  human
GCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGGTCGCAAGACTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGGCGGGGGAGCACTACAACGGGTGGAGCCTGCGGTTTAATTGGATTCAACGCCGGGCATCTTACCA  Methanococcus
ACCGCCTGGGGAGTACGGCCGCAAGGTTAAAACTCAAATGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGC ACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGATGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCT   E. coli
GTTCCGGGGGGAGTATGGTTGCAAAGCTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGACGGAAGGGCACCACCAGGAGTGGAGCCTGCGGCTTAATTTGACTCAACACGGGAAACCTCACCC  human

Figure 1–17 Genetic information conserved since the days of the last universal common ancestor of all living things.
A part of the gene that codes for the smaller of the two main ribosomal RNA (rRNA) molecules in the ribosome is shown. (The
complete molecule is about 1500–1900 nucleotides long, depending on the species.) Corresponding segments of nucleotide
sequences from an archaeon (Methanococcus jannaschii), a bacterium (Escherichia coli), and a eukaryote (Homo sapiens)
are aligned. The red vertical lines indicate sites where the nucleotides are identical between the species; the human sequence
is repeated at the bottom of the alignment so that all three two-way comparisons can be seen. The black dot halfway along
the E. coli sequence denotes a site where a nucleotide has been either deleted from the bacterial lineage in the course of
evolution or inserted in the other two lineages. Note that the sequences from these three organisms, representative of the
three domains of the living world, still retain unmistakable similarities.

=== Original PDF page 58 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                19


compare the three domains of the living world, we can begin to see which genes
are common to all of them—and must therefore have been present in the last
universal common ancestral cell that was the founder of all present-day living
things. We can also identify those genes that are peculiar to a single branch in the
tree of life. To explain such findings, we need to consider how new genes arise
and, more generally, how genomes evolve.

New Genes Are Generated from Preexisting Genes

The raw material of evolution is the DNA sequence that already exists: there is no
natural mechanism for making long stretches of new, random, DNA sequence. In
this sense, no gene is ever entirely new. Innovation can, however, occur in several
ways (Figure 1–18):
    1.  Intragenic mutation: an existing gene can be randomly modified by
      changes in its DNA sequence, through various types of errors that occur in
      the process of DNA replication and DNA repair.

    2. Gene duplication: an existing gene can be accidentally duplicated, creating
      a pair of initially identical genes within a single cell; these two genes may
      then diverge in the course of evolution.

    3. DNA segment shuffling: two or more existing genes can break and rejoin to
     make a hybrid gene consisting of DNA segments that originally belonged
       to separate genes.

    4. Horizontal (intercellular) DNA transfer: a piece of DNA can be transferred
      from the genome of one cell to that of another—including between species.
      This process contrasts with the usual vertical transfer of genetic informa-
       tion from parent to progeny.



             ORIGINAL GENOME                               GENETIC INNOVATION

                                        INTRAGENIC             mutation
                                   MUTATION
     1
                   gene


                                      GENE
                                      DUPLICATION
     2                                                            +



             gene A                DNA SEGMENT
                                        SHUFFLING
     3              +                                             +

             gene B


              organism A



                                    HORIZONTAL                                         Figure 1–18 Four modes of genetic
                               DNA TRANSFER                                        innovation and their effects on the DNA
     4        +                                                            sequence of an organism. A special
                                                                                            form of horizontal transfer occurs when
                                                                                                                       cells of two different species enter into a
                                                                                       permanent symbiotic association; genes
                                                                                             from one of the cells may subsequently be
                                                                                                           transferred to the genome of the other, as
                organism B                                                    we will see later when we discuss the likely
                                                                   organism B with               evolutionary origins of mitochondria and
                                                         new gene                   chloroplasts.

=== Original PDF page 59 ===
20     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


                              283 genes in families with                                         Figure 1–19 Families of evolutionarily
                                 38–77 gene members                                              related genes in the genome of Bacillus
                                                                                                                   subtilis. The largest gene family in this
       764 genes in families with                                                                 bacterium consists of 77 genes coding for
            4–19 gene members                                                                                varieties of a class of membrane transport
                                                                                                        proteins called ABC transporters, which
                                                                                                     are found in all three domains of the living
                                                                     2126 genes with                  world. (Adapted from F. Kunst et al., Nature
                                                         no family relationship           390:249–256, 1997.)
           273 genes in families
           with 3 gene members




                        568 genes in families
                        with 2 gene members


   Each of these types of change leaves a characteristic trace in the DNA sequence
of the organism, and there is clear evidence that all four processes have occurred
frequently during evolution. In Chapters 4 and 5, we discuss the mechanisms
underlying these changes, but for the present we focus on the consequences.

Gene Duplications Give Rise to Families of Related Genes Within a
Single Genome

A cell duplicates its entire genome each time it divides into two daughter cells.
However, accidents occasionally result in the inappropriate duplication of just
part of the genome, with retention of both the original and duplicate segments
in a single cell. Once a gene has been duplicated in this way (see mode 2 in
Figure 1–18), the two gene copies can acquire mutations and become specialized
to perform different functions within the same cell and its descendants. Repeated
rounds of this process of gene duplication and divergence, over many millions
of years, have enabled one gene to give rise to a family of related genes within a
single genome. Analysis of the DNA sequence of prokaryotic genomes reveals
many examples of such gene families: in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, for
example, 47% of the genes have one or more obvious relatives (Figure 1–19).
   The above evolutionary process must be distinguished from the genetic diver-
gence that occurs when one species of organism splits into two separate lines of
descent at a branch point in the family tree—when the human line separated from
that of chimpanzees, for example. In the latter case, the genes gradually become
different in the course of evolution, but they are likely to continue to have corre-
sponding functions in the two sister species. Genes that are related by descent in
this way—that is, genes in two separate species that derive from the same ances-
tral gene in the last common ancestor of those two species—are called orthologs.
Related genes that have resulted from a gene duplication event within a single
genome—and are likely to have diverged in their function—are called paralogs.
Genes that are related by descent in either way are called homologs, a general
term used to cover both types of relationship (Figure 1–20).

The Function of a Gene Can Often Be Deduced from Its
Nucleotide Sequence

Family relationships among genes are important not just for their evolutionary
interest, but also because they simplify the task of deciphering gene functions.
Once the nucleotide sequence of a newly discovered gene has been deter-
mined, a scientist can tap a few keys on a computer to search large databases of
known gene sequences for gene relatives. In many cases, the function of one or
more of these homologs will have been already determined experimentally—
generally in one of the model organisms described later in this chapter. Because
gene sequence determines gene function, one can frequently make a good
guess at the new gene’s function, as it is likely to be similar to that of the already

=== Original PDF page 60 ===
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE                                                21


              ancestral organism                            ancestral organism                          Figure 1–20 Two types of gene
                                                                               homology based on different
                                                                                                evolutionary pathways. (A) Orthologs.
                   gene G                                gene G                                   (B) Paralogs. Genes related by either
                                                                                  mechanism are called homologs.

                        SPECIATION TO GIVE TWO               GENE DUPLICATION
                       SEPARATE SPECIES                   AND DIVERGENCE

             species A          species B                            later organism
                                                        gene G1
           gene GA        gene GB

                                                        gene G2
          genes GA and GB are orthologs                genes G1 and G2 are paralogs
          (A)                                                   (B)



known homologs. In this way, it is possible to decipher a great deal about the
biology of an organism simply by analyzing the DNA sequence of its genome.

More Than 200 Gene Families Are Common to All Three Domains
of Life

Given the complete genome sequences of representative organisms from all three
domains of life—eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea—we can search systemat-
ically for homologies that span this enormous evolutionary divide. In this way,
we can begin to take stock of the common inheritance of all living things. There
are considerable difficulties in this enterprise. For example, individual species
have often lost some of the ancestral genes, and other genes have almost cer-
tainly been acquired by horizontal transfer from another species and therefore
are not truly ancestral. In fact, genome comparisons strongly suggest that both
lineage-specific gene loss and horizontal gene transfer, in some cases between
evolutionarily distant species, have been major factors in evolution, at least
among bacteria and archaea. As an additional difficulty, in the course of 2 or
3 billion years, some genes that were initially shared will have changed beyond
recognition through mutation.
   Because of all these vagaries of the evolutionary process, it is difficult,  if
not impossible, to determine the ancestral gene set that diversified into the
present-day variety of life. A crude approximation can be obtained by tallying
the gene families that have representatives in multiple—but not necessarily all—
species from the three major domains of life. One such analysis revealed 264
ancient conserved families, each of which could be assigned a function on the
basis of the best-characterized family member. As shown in Table 1–1, the larg-
est number of shared gene families were involved in translation and in amino
acid metabolism and transport. However, it must be emphasized that this set
of highly conserved gene families represents only a very rough sketch of the
common inheritance of all modern life.

Summary

For most of human history, the living world around us was classified by what
we could see. Genome sequencing has radically changed our view of life on the
planet, and we now realize that living things fall into three broad domains: bac-
teria, archaea, and eukaryotes. The organisms in the first two domains are largely
invisible to our naked eye, and many of them cannot yet be grown in a laboratory—
being known only by their DNA sequences. But they make up the vast majority of
life’s evolutionary diversity, including species that can obtain all their energy and
nutrients from inorganic chemical sources—such as the reactive mixtures of min-
erals released at hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor—the sort of diet that may

=== Original PDF page 61 ===
22     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life



 TABLE 1–1 The Number of Gene Families, Classified by Function, Common to All Three Domains of the Living World

                    Information processing                                       Metabolism

  Translation                                 63        Energy production and conversion               19

  Transcription                                                                 7        Carbohydrate transport and metabolism           16

 DNA replication, recombination, and repair         13       Amino acid transport and metabolism             43

                 Cellular processes and signaling                Nucleotide transport and metabolism             15

  Cell-cycle control, mitosis, and meiosis                         2       Coenzyme transport and metabolism             22

 Defense mechanisms                                                    3          Lipid transport and metabolism                                     9

 Signal-transduction mechanisms                                  1         Inorganic ion transport and metabolism                         8

  Cell wall/membrane biogenesis                                     2        Secondary metabolite biosynthesis,                               5
                                                                     transport, and catabolism

  Intracellular trafficking and secretion                              4                            Poorly characterized

  Post-translational modification, protein                          8         General biochemical function predicted;           24
  turnover, chaperones                                               specific biological role unknown

  For the purpose of this analysis, gene families are defined as “universal” if they are represented in the genomes of at least two diverse archaea
  (Archaeoglobus fulgidus and Aeropyrum pernix), two evolutionarily distant bacteria (Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis), and one eukaryote
  (yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae). (Data from R.L. Tatusov et al., Science 278:631–637, 1997; R.L. Tatusov et al., BMC Bioinformatics 4:41,
 2003; and the COGs database at the US National Library of Medicine.)



have nourished the first living cells more than 3.5 billion years ago. The eukary-
otes (whose cells are larger and contain a variety of membrane-bound organelles)
evolved later in evolutionary history and are consequently less diverse as a group
than either the bacteria or archaea. Eukaryotes, which include all plants and
animals, are the organisms most familiar to us, and they are the main focus of
this textbook.
  Many of the genes within a single organism or species show strong family
resemblances in their DNA sequences, implying that they originated from the same
ancestral gene through gene duplication and divergence. Family resemblances
(homologies) are also clear when gene sequences are compared between different
species, and more than 200 gene families have been so highly conserved that they
can be recognized as common to most species from all three domains of the living
world, suggesting they were present in the ancestral cell from which all life evolved.
Given the DNA sequence of a newly discovered gene in any organism, it is therefore
often possible to deduce the gene’s function from the known function of a homolo-
gous gene in a better-studied organism.

EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN
OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
Eukaryotic cells, in general, are bigger and more elaborate than bacterial and
archaeal cells, and their genomes are bigger and more elaborate, too. The greater
cell size is accompanied by radical differences in cell structure and function: in
particular, eukaryotes contain a diverse set of intracellular organelles—discrete
membrane-enclosed subcompartments and large membraneless macromolecu-
lar assemblies—each with a distinct composition and function. Some eukaryotic
cells live independent lives as single-cell organisms. Others live in multicellular
assemblies—indeed, all of the more complex multicellular organisms on Earth,
including plants, animals, and fungi, are formed from eukaryotic cells.
  We begin by discussing how eukaryotic cells are organized and how they
might have evolved from more ancient prokaryotes. We then briefly consider how
eukaryotic genomes differ from those of prokaryotes, as well as how the cells in

=== Original PDF page 62 ===
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL                                         23


multicellular organisms become differently specialized as an embryo develops,
so as to contribute to the welfare of the organism as a whole.

Eukaryotic Cells Contain a Variety of Organelles

By definition, eukaryotic cells keep almost all their DNA in a membrane-enclosed
internal compartment—the nucleus, which is usually the most conspicuous organ-
elle (Figure 1–21). The long DNA polymers in the nucleus are packaged with
proteins to form chromosomes, which only become visible in a light microscope
when they condense in preparation for cell division. The nuclear envelope, a double
layer of membrane, surrounds the nucleus and separates the nuclear DNA from the
cytoplasm, which, in a eukaryotic cell, includes everything between the plasma mem-
brane and the nucleus. As shown in the figure, the nuclear envelope is perforated by
nuclear pores, which are channels formed by protein complexes that mediate the
two-way traffic of large molecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
   Eukaryotic cells have many other features that set them apart from bacterial
and archaeal cells. They are typically 10–30 times bigger in linear dimension and
1000–10,000 times larger in volume than a typical prokaryotic cell. They have an
elaborate cytoskeleton in the cytoplasm, consisting of several types of protein
filaments (see Figure 1–21) that, together with the many proteins that attach to
them, form a network of girders, ropes, and motors that gives the cell mechanical
strength and performs various other functions: when the cell divides, for exam-
ple, the cytoskeleton reorganizes and pulls the replicated chromosomes apart
and distributes them equally to the two daughter cells. In the case of animal cells
and some free-living, single-cell eukaryotes, the cytoskeleton controls cell shape


                                              centrosome with
                                                      pair of centrioles

            microtubule                                       chromatin (DNA)                                         extracellular matrix

                                                                               nuclear pore       nuclear
                                                                                          envelope


                                                                                                                                                   vesicles





                                                                                                                         lysosome


                                                                                                          mitochondrion


                                                                                                       5 µm   actin
   ﬁlaments
                                                                                      nucleolus             endoplasmic
                                                                                              nucleus       reticulum
            peroxisome                                               plasma
                                                          membrane
                    ribosomes in        Golgi        intermediate
                          cytosol        apparatus       ﬁlaments

Figure 1–21 The major features of eukaryotic cells. The drawing depicts the major contents of a typical animal cell seen in
cross section, but almost all the same components are found in plant cells and fungi, as well as in single-cell eukaryotes. The
cytoskeleton (discussed in Chapter 16) consists of three types of protein filaments: actin filaments (red), microtubules (green),
and intermediate filaments (blue). Plant cells (not shown) contain chloroplasts in addition to the components shown here; they
also have a rigid external cell wall that contains cellulose surrounding their plasma membrane, which means they are largely
immobile. The interior of cells is, in reality, much more crowded than depicted in this simplified diagram.

=== Original PDF page 63 ===
24     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


                                                  cell surface protrusions                                      Figure 1–22 Phagocytosis. An electron
                                                                                            micrograph of a mammalian phagocytic
                                                                                                   white blood cell (a neutrophil) ingesting a
                                                                                              bacterium that is in the process of dividing.
                       dividing                                                                   Only the part of the cell that is extending
                     bacterium                                                                      surface protrusions to engulf the bacterium
                                                                                                                                       is shown. (Courtesy of Dorothy Bainton.)
                    plasma
                 membrane





                                               phagocytic                                                             1 µm                                            white blood cell


and drives and guides cell movements (Movie 1.1). Lacking the kind of tough
cell wall characteristic of bacteria and archaea, these eukaryotic cells can change
their shape rapidly, in some cases enabling them to move and engulf other cells
and small objects by a process called phagocytosis (Figure 1–22).
   There are many other membrane-enclosed organelles in eukaryotic cells.
Unlike the nucleus, most of them are enclosed by single membranes. The most
extensive organelle is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is where most cell
membrane components are made, along with materials destined for secretion to
the outside of the cell. The Golgi apparatus receives these molecules from the ER
and modifies and packages them for secretion or transport to another cell com-
partment. Lysosomes are small irregularly shaped organelles in which intracellular
digestion occurs. Peroxisomes are small vesicles where hydrogen peroxide is used
to inactivate toxic molecules.
  A continual exchange of materials occurs between these single-membrane-       IMPORT BY ENDOCYTOSIS
enclosed organelles, mediated mainly by small transport vesicles that pinch off
from the membrane of one organelle and fuse with that of another. To connect the
eukaryotic cell with its surroundings, a similar vesicle-mediated exchange goes                              endosome
on continually at the cell surface. Here, portions of the plasma membrane pinch
in to form intracellular vesicles that carry material captured from the external                                 plasma
                                                                                                          membrane
medium into the cell—a process called endocytosis; and in the reverse process,
called exocytosis, vesicles from inside the cell fuse with the plasma membrane
and release their contents to the exterior (Figure 1–23).                                                                   Golgi
                                                                                                                                 apparatus
   Besides the nucleus, there are two other eukaryotic cell organelles that are
enclosed in double membranes—mitochondria and, in plant cells and algae,
chloroplasts. Mitochondria take up oxygen and harness energy from the oxi-
dation of food molecules, such as sugars and fats, to produce most of the ATP
(adenosine triphosphate) that powers the cell’s activities. Chloroplasts perform       EXPORT BY EXOCYTOSIS
photosynthesis in plant cells and algae, using the energy of sunlight to synthe-
size carbohydrates from atmospheric CO2 and water, delivering these energy-rich     Figure 1–23 Endocytosis and exocytosis
products to the host cell as food. In many eukaryotic cells, roughly half of the    across the plasma membrane. Eukaryotic
cytoplasm is occupied by membrane-enclosed organelles. The surrounding fluid      cells import extracellular materials by
is called the cytosol. It contains ribosomes, which translate RNAs into proteins,     endocytosis and secrete intracellular
                                                                                                         materials by exocytosis. The endocytosed
and it is also where most of the cell’s other metabolic reactions take place.                                                                                                           material is first delivered to single-
   In addition to the membrane-enclosed organelles just described, eukary-    membrane-enclosed organelles called
otic cells contain a variety of smaller organelles that lack membranes. Instead,    endosomes, discussed in Chapter 12.

=== Original PDF page 64 ===
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL                                         25


                                                         mitochondrion                           Figure 1–24 Membrane-enclosed
                                                                                              organelles are distributed throughout
                         lysosome                                                             the eukaryotic cell cytoplasm. The
                                                           peroxisome                        membrane-enclosed organelles, shown
                                                                                                                             in different colors, are each specialized to
                                                                        cytosol                            perform a different function. The cytoplasm
                                                                                                             that fills the space outside of these
                                                                                                       organelles is called the cytosol.
                                                                  Golgi                        nuclear
                                                               apparatus                      envelope




                        transport                            endoplasmic
                           vesicle                                 reticulum

                                  endosome


multiple components that work together are held in close proximity in bio-
molecular condensates, which will be described in Chapters 3, 6, and 12. An
example is the nucleolus, where ribosome assembly takes place (see Figure 1–21).
Figure 1–24 summarizes the membrane-enclosed organelles in eukaryotic cells,
each of which will be discussed in detail in later chapters.

Mitochondria Evolved from a Symbiotic Bacterium Captured
by an Ancient Archaeon

A fundamental question in both evolution and cell biology is how did the first
eukaryotic cell arise? The evidence suggests that it happened when an archaeal
and a bacterial cell merged about 2 billion years ago, in a world that had con-
tained only prokaryotes for more than 1.5 billion years.
    All eukaryotic cells contain (or at one time did contain) mitochondria
(Figure 1–25). Mitochondria are similar in size to small bacteria, and both repro-
duce by dividing. The mitochondria contain their own DNA, with genes that
resemble bacterial genes; they also contain their own ribosomes and translation
factors that resemble those in bacteria. These and other similarities between
mitochondria and present-day bacteria provide strong evidence that mito-
chondria evolved from an aerobic bacterium (one that harvested energy by
combining electrons derived from foodstuffs with oxygen gas) that was captured



   (A)                                                                     (B)





                                                                                             Figure 1–25 A mitochondrion. (A) An
                                                                                                         electron micrograph of the organelle
                                                                                        seen in cross section. (B) A drawing of
                                                                                       a mitochondrion with part of it cut away
                                                                                                          to show the three-dimensional structure
                                                                                         (Movie 1.2). Note the smooth outer
                                                                              membrane and the convoluted inner
                                                                                  membrane, which houses the proteins that
                                                                                               generate ATP from the oxidation of food
                                                                                                  molecules. (A, courtesy of Daniel S. Friend
                                              100 nm                                    and by permission of E.L. Bearer.)

=== Original PDF page 65 ===
26     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


Figure 1–26 A scanning electron micrograph of an Asgard archaeon in culture. This anaerobic         archaeon         archaeon
cell proliferates very slowly, doubling only about every 20 days (compared to every half hour or                   cell body             cell protrusions
so for the bacterium E. coli). It can be seen to extend elaborate membranous protrusions from its
surface—including “blebs” and unique branched and unbranched structures. These protrusions
are intimately associated with two other species—one bacterial, one archaeal—that were isolated
with the Asgard strain as ectosymbionts, as indicated. The scientists had maintained the deep
marine sediment under anaerobic conditions in a bioreactor for more than 2000 days, mimicking
conditions of the seabed, and they attempted to culture samples from this bioreactor under a range
of different conditions. Only after many years and repeated subculturing were they able to isolate
this archaeon with its ectosymbionts. (From H. Imachi et al., Nature 577:519–525, 2020.)


by an anaerobic cell. These two cells (and their descendants) were then able
to evolve an endosymbiotic relationship, providing mutual metabolic support
within a common cytoplasm.
   There are also good reasons to believe that the ancestral capturing cell was an
archaeon. As we have seen, the genomes of present-day archaea encode many           ectosymbionts            1 µm
proteins that are characteristic of present-day eukaryotic cells. Those archaea
with the most eukaryotic-like genes belong to the Asgard lineage, first identified
by sequencing DNA fragments obtained from the seabed. But no living example
had been seen or cultivated—until very recently, when, after a heroic 12-year-
long isolation procedure, the first Asgard archaeon was propagated in culture.
This remarkable, living, anaerobic archaeon looked like no other prokaryote—
having long branching protrusions—and it seemed to live in an ectosymbiotic
relationship with another bacterium and another archaeon, both of which were
isolated with it (Figure 1–26). The discovery of the strange Asgard archaeon pro-
vides a glimpse of how an ancient archaeon might eventually have captured an
aerobic bacterium to initiate the eukaryotic lineage, with a hypothetical pathway
being illustrated in Figure 1–27 and discussed in detail in Chapter 12.

Chloroplasts Evolved from a Symbiotic Photosynthetic Bacterium
Engulfed by an Ancient Eukaryotic Cell
Chloroplasts (Figure 1–28) perform photosynthesis in plant cells and algae, using
the energy of sunlight to synthesize their own “food” (in the form of carbohy-
                                                                                             Figure 1–27 A possible model for somedrates) from atmospheric CO2 and water. Like mitochondria, they are enclosed in                                                                                                     early steps in eukaryotic cell evolution.
double membranes, have their own “circular” genomes, and reproduce by divid-      In this model, the surface protrusions of
ing. They almost certainly evolved from a symbiotic photosynthetic bacterium    an ancient Asgard archaeon expanded
that was captured by an ancient eukaryotic cell that already possessed mitochon-    and surrounded an ectosymbiotic aerobic
dria. This bacterium may have been captured by phagocytosis, a frequent process     bacterium to create a symbiotic relationship
                                                                                     between the two types of cells. Eventually,
in eukaryotes (see Figure 1–22).                                                                                                    the protrusions fused with one another,
   Whereas some single-cell eukaryotes are hunters that live by capturing     trapping the bacterium as an endosymbiont
other cells and eating them (see Figure 1–34), a eukaryotic cell equipped with      in the archaeon cytoplasm, where it was
chloroplasts has no need to chase after other cells as prey; it is nourished by the       initially enclosed by an internal membrane
captive chloroplasts it has inherited from its ancient eukaryotic ancestors. Cor-     derived from the archaeon’s plasma
                                                                             membrane (the bacterium itself retaining
respondingly, plant cells, although they possess the cytoskeletal equipment for                                                                                                                                            its own membranes). At some point, the
movement, have lost the ability to change shape rapidly and to engulf other cells    endosymbiont escaped from the enclosing
                                                                                                archaeon-derived membrane and entered
                                                                                                    the cytosol, where it eventually evolved
archaeon DNA          expanded archaeal                    forming nuclear                           into a mitochondrion—with both its DNA
                          protrusions                           envelope                                                                                   and membranes derived from the engulfed
                                                                                                  bacterium. As shown, it is postulated
                                                                                                             that the internal archaeon membranes
                                                                                             generated by this mechanism of protrusion
                                                                                            expansion and fusion progressively formed
                                                                                            both the nucleus and single-membrane-
                                                                                             enclosed organelles, such as the
  bacterial                                                                                          endoplasmic reticulum. The evidence ectosymbiont
 DNA                 surface       bacterial                    forming                                   for this general type of model of eukaryotic-
                       protrusions  endosymbiont                endoplasmic reticulum                    cell evolution is discussed further in
                                                                                           Chapter 12. (Adapted from H. Imachi
                                              ESCAPE OF ENDOSYMBIONT INTO CYTOSOL         et al., Nature 577:519–525, 2020, and        ENCLOSURE OF ECTOSYMBIONT
                                     AND FORMATION OF NEW INTRACELLULAR        from D.A. Baum and B. Baum, BMC Biol.       BY ARCHAEAL MEMBRANE FUSION
                                                 COMPARTMENTS                   12:76–92, 2014.)

=== Original PDF page 66 ===
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL                                         27


                          chloroplasts                                                             Figure 1–28 Chloroplasts. In plant
                                                                                                                       cells and single-celled photosynthetic
                                                                                                   eukaryotes, these organelles capture
                                                                                                    the energy of sunlight. (A) A light
                                                                                            micrograph of a single cell isolated from
                                                                                       a leaf of a flowering plant, showing
                                                                                                    the green chloroplasts (Movie 1.3 and
                                                                                         see Movie 14.10). (B) A drawing of one
                                                                                                            chloroplast, showing the highly folded
                                                                                  chlorophyll-
                                                                                        system of internal membranes containing                                                                            containing
                                                                                   internal                   the chlorophyll molecules that absorb light.
                                                               membranes                  (A, courtesy of Preeti Dahiya.)



                                                                              inner
                                                            membrane

                                                                           outer
                                                            membrane





            (A)                                                 (B)
                                  10 µm


by phagocytosis. Instead, they wrap themselves in a tough, protective cell wall. If
some eukaryotic cells can be viewed as hunters, then one might view plant cells
as having given up hunting for farming.
   Fungi represent yet another eukaryotic way of life. Fungal cells, like animal
cells, possess mitochondria but not chloroplasts; they have a tough outer wall
that limits their ability to move rapidly or to take up other cells. Fungi, it seems,
have turned from hunters into scavengers. Other cells secrete nutrient molecules
or release them after death, and fungi feed on these leavings—often performing
whatever digestion is necessary extracellularly, by secreting digestive enzymes to
the exterior.

Eukaryotes Have Hybrid Genomes

As just discussed, the genetic information of eukaryotic cells has a hybrid origin—
from an ancestral anaerobic archaeon and from the bacteria it adopted as endo-
symbionts (Figure 1–29). Most of this genetic information (DNA) is stored in the
nucleus, although a small amount remains inside the organelles that evolved



     nonphotosynthetic    photosynthetic                                                plants       animals      fungi      archaea
           bacteria              bacteria


                                                                                             Figure 1–29 A model for the evolution
                                                                                                   of eukaryotic cells in the tree of life. All                                         chloroplasts
                                                                                                                                living cells are thought to have evolved
                                                                                             from an ancestral prokaryotic cell (the
                                                                                                                          last universal common ancestor)
                                                  single-celled eukaryote                              between 3.5 and 3.8 billion years ago).
         TIME                             mitochondria                                         Manyanaerobicmillionsarchaeonof yearsacquiredlater, it seemsan aerobican
                                                                                                                bacterial symbiont, which evolved into
                                                                                                mitochondria (see Figure 1–27). Later still,
                                                                                       a mitochondria-containing eukaryotic cell
                            bacteria                           archaea
                                                                                                 acquired a photosynthetic bacterium, which
                                                                                                evolved into chloroplasts. Mitochondria are
                                                                                                                 essentially the same in plants, animals, and
                                                                                                                   fungi, indicating that they were acquired
                                                                                                   before these three lineages diverged about
                                         ancestral prokaryote
                                                                                                 1.5 billion years ago.

=== Original PDF page 67 ===
28     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


from the captured bacteria—the mitochondria and, in plant and algal cells, the
chloroplasts. When the mitochondrial DNA and the chloroplast DNA are sepa-
rated from the nuclear DNA and individually sequenced, both the mitochondrial
and chloroplast genomes are found to be cut-down versions of the corresponding
bacterial genomes: in a human cell, for example, the mitochondrial genome con-
sists of only 16,569 nucleotide pairs, and it codes for only 13 proteins plus a set of
24 RNAs involved in protein synthesis.
  Many of the genes that are missing from the mitochondria and chloroplasts
have not been lost; instead, they have moved from the endosymbiont genomes
into the DNA of the host-cell nucleus. Thus the nuclear DNA of animals contains
many genes coding for proteins that serve essential functions inside the mito-
chondria; in plants and algae, the nuclear DNA contains many genes specifying
proteins required in chloroplasts. In both cases, the DNA sequences of these
nuclear genes still show clear evidence of their bacterial origins.

Eukaryotic Genomes Are Big

Natural selection has evidently favored mitochondria with small genomes. By
contrast, the nuclear genomes of most eukaryotes seem to have been free to
enlarge. Perhaps the eukaryotic way of life has made large size an advantage:
predatory cells, for example, typically need to be bigger than their prey, and cell
size generally increases in proportion to genome size. Whatever the reason, the
genomes of most eukaryotes have become hundreds of times larger than those of
bacteria and archaea (Figure 1–30).
   The freedom to be extravagant with DNA has had profound implications.
Eukaryotes not only have more genes than prokaryotes; they also have vastly
more DNA that does not code for protein or RNA. The human genome contains
about 700 times as many nucleotide pairs as the genome of a typical bacterium
such as E. coli, but it contains only about 4.5 times as many protein-coding
genes because a much greater proportion of the human genome does not code
for protein (∼98.5% compared to 11% in E. coli). The estimated genome sizes
and gene numbers for a few selected eukaryotes are compared with the bacte-
rium E. coli in Table 1–2; we will discuss shortly how each of these organisms
serves as a model organism.

Eukaryotic Genomes Are Rich in Regulatory DNA

As discussed in Chapter 4, much of our nonprotein-coding DNA is almost cer-
tainly dispensable “junk,” retained during evolution like a mass of old papers
because, when there is little pressure to keep an archive small, it is easier to retain



                              E. coli
                             BACTERIA

                Halobacterium sp.
                     ARCHAEA

                                    malarial parasite                                   amoeba               Figure 1–30 Genome sizes compared.
      PROTOZOANS
                                                                         Genome size is measured in nucleotide
                                   yeast (S. cerevisiae)                                                            (base) pairs of DNA per haploid genome,
                  FUNGI                                                                                                             that is, per single copy of the genome.
                                               Arabidopsis                 wheat                              (The body cells of sexually reproducing,
                     PLANTS, ALGAE                                                                          multicellular organisms such as ourselves
                                          Caenorhabditis                                                     are generally diploid: they contain two
          NEMATODE WORMS                                                                 copies of the genome, one inherited from
                                                 Drosophila           shrimp                                    the mother, the other from the father.)
                  CRUSTACEANS, INSECTS                                                  Note that closely related organisms can
                                                        zebraﬁsh  frog    newt                              vary widely in the quantity of DNA in their
                          AMPHIBIANS, FISHES                                         genomes (as indicated by the length of
                                                     human                                    the green bars), even though they contain
                    MAMMALS, BIRDS, REPTILES                                                       similar numbers of protein-coding genes.
                                                                                                    (Data from T.R. Gregory, 2021. Animal
  105          106          107          108          109          1010         1011         1012     Genome Size Database: www.genomesize
                                 nucleotide pairs per haploid genome                                   .com.)

=== Original PDF page 68 ===
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL                                         29



 TABLE 1–2 Some Model Organisms and Their Genomes

                                Approximate genome   Approximate number
                                          size* (nucleotide        of protein-coding
 Organism                                     pairs)                 genes**

  Escherichia coli (bacterium)                4.6 × 106              4300
 Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)        12.5 × 106              6600
 Caenorhabditis elegans               100 × 106              20,000
 (roundworm)

  Arabidopsis thaliana (plant)             135 × 106              27,000
  Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)        180 × 106              14,000
 Danio rerio (zebrafish)                1400 × 106              26,000
 Mus musculus (mouse)               2800 × 106              20,000
 Homo sapiens (human)               3100 × 106              20,000

 *Genome size includes an estimate for the amount of highly repeated, noncoding DNA
  sequence, which does not appear in genome databases.
  **There are also genes that code for functional RNA molecules that do not code for proteins.


everything than to sort out the valuable information and discard the rest. Certain
exceptional eukaryotic species, such as the puffer fish, bear witness to the prof-
ligacy of their relatives; they have somehow managed to rid themselves of large
quantities of nonprotein-coding DNA, and, yet, they appear similar in structure,
behavior, and fitness to related species that have vastly more such DNA.
   Even in compact eukaryotic genomes such as that of the puffer fish, there is
more nonprotein-coding DNA than protein-coding DNA. As in all eukaryotic
organisms, at least some of the noncoding DNA certainly has important func-
tions. In particular, it regulates the expression of genes. With this regulatory DNA,
eukaryotes have evolved distinctive, highly sophisticated ways of controlling
when and where a gene is brought into play. Elaborate mechanisms for gene
regulation are especially crucial for the formation and function of complex mul-
ticellular organisms, which have many different cell types, each with different
functions, as we now discuss.

Eukaryotic Genomes Define the Program of Multicellular
Development

The cells in an individual animal or plant are extraordinarily varied. Blood cells,
skin cells, bone cells, nerve cells—they seem as dissimilar as any cells could be
(Figure 1–31). Yet all these cell types are the descendants of a single fertilized egg
cell, and all (with very minor exceptions) contain identical copies of the genome
of the species.
   The differences result from the way in which the cells make selective use
of their genetic instructions according to their developmental history and the
cues they receive from their surroundings in a developing embryo. The DNA is
not just a shopping list specifying the molecules that every cell must have, and the                     neuron
cell is not an assembly of all the items on the list. Rather, the cell behaves as a mul-
tipurpose machine, with sensors to receive environmental signals and with highly                      neutrophil
developed abilities to call different sets of genes into action according to signals it
receives. The genome in each cell is big enough to accommodate the information                        25 µm
that specifies an entire multicellular organism, but in any individual cell only part
of that information is used.                                                                Figure 1–31 Cell types can vary
                                                                                    enormously in size and shape. A human
  Many genes in the eukaryotic genome code for proteins that regulate the                                                                                                nerve cell is compared here with a human
activities of other genes, a topic discussed in detail in Chapter 7. Most of these     neutrophil, a type of white blood cell. Both
regulatory genes encode transcription regulators that act by binding, directly or     are drawn to scale.

=== Original PDF page 69 ===
30     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


                                                                                             Figure 1–32 Genetic control of the
                                                                                 program of multicellular development.
                                                                                    The role of a regulatory gene is
                                                                                          demonstrated in the snapdragon
                                                                                                        Antirrhinum. In this example, a mutation
                                                                                                                             in a single gene coding for a regulatory
                                                                                                          protein causes leafy shoots to develop in
                                                                                                 place of flowers: because the regulator
                                                                                                          protein has been changed, the cells adopt
                                                                                                   characters that would be appropriate to a
                                                                                                                      different location in the normal plant. The
                                                                                         mutant is on the left, the normal plant on
                                                                                                    the right. (Courtesy of Enrico Coen and
                                                                                   Rosemary Carpenter.)





indirectly, to the many different DNA sequences that control which genes are to
be expressed, and at what levels. Eukaryotic genomes also produce many noncod-
ing RNA molecules; as the name implies, they are not translated into protein but
control gene expression in a variety of ways. The expanded genome of eukaryotes
therefore not only specifies the hardware of the cell but also stores the software
that controls how that hardware is used (Figure 1–32).
   Cells do not just passively receive signals; rather, they actively exchange signals
with their neighbors. Thus, in a developing multicellular organism, an internal
control system governs each cell that has different consequences depending on
the messages exchanged. The outcome, astonishingly, is a precisely patterned
array of cells of different types, each displaying a character appropriate to its posi-                                                                                             Figure 1–33 An assortment of single-cell
tion in the multicellular structure.                                                       eukaryotes. The drawings are done to
                                                                                                                      different scales, but in each case the scale
Many Eukaryotes Live as Solitary Cells                                           bar represents 10 μm. The organisms                                                                                                                             in (A), (C), and (G) are ciliates; (B) is a
Many species of eukaryotic cells lead a solitary life. As we have seen, some of     heliozoan; (D) is an amoeba; (E) is a
                                                                                                                   dinoflagellate; and (F) is a euglenoid.
these single-cell organisms are hunters, some are photosynthesizers, still oth-                                                                                                  (Courtesy of Michael Sleigh, from M.A.
ers are scavengers. Figure 1–33 conveys something of the astonishing variety of     Sleigh, Biology of Protozoa. Edinburgh:
single-cell eukaryotes, whose anatomy can be remarkably elaborate, including    Edward Arnold, 1973.)





                                                                              (D)





   (A)                               (B)                             (C)                 (E)                             (F)                    (G)

=== Original PDF page 70 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         31



(A)                                                        (B)
                                                                                             Figure 1–34 A single-cell eukaryote
                                                                                                    that eats other cells. (A) Didinium is
                                                                                       a carnivorous protist, belonging to the
                                                                                         group of ciliates. (A protist is defined as a
                                                                                                                            free-living, single-cell, mobile eukaryote.)
                                                                                                 Didinium has a globular body, about
                                                                                  150 μm in diameter, encircled by
                                                                                     two fringes of cilia—sinuous, whiplike
                                                                                     appendages that beat continually; its
                                                                                                                     front end is flattened except for a single
                                                                                                             protrusion, rather like a snout. (B) A
                                                                                                  Didinium engulfing its prey. It normally
                                                                                   swims around in the water at high speed
                                                                                       by means of the synchronous beating of
                                                                                                                                              its cilia. When it encounters a suitable prey,
                                                                                                              usually another type of protist, it releases
                                                                                     numerous small paralyzing darts from its
                                                                                               snout region. Then, it attaches to and
                                                                                            devours its prey (artificially colored yellow)
                                                                                       by phagocytosis, inverting like a hollow ball
                          100 µm                                                                                                          to engulf its victim, which can be almost as
                                                                                                             large as itself. (Courtesy of D. Barlow.)


such structures as sensory bristles, photoreceptors, sinuously beating cilia, leglike
appendages, mouth parts, stinging darts, and muscle-like contractile bundles.
Although they are single cells, they can be as intricate, as versatile, and as com-
plex in their behavior as many multicellular organisms (Figure 1–34, Movie 1.4,
and Movie 1.5).
  Humans tend to focus on plants and animals, while neglecting single-cell
eukaryotes because (along with bacteria and archaea) they are microscopic.
But thanks to DNA comparisons, we now know that the genomes of single-cell
eukaryotes are far more evolutionarily diverse than those of multicellular animals
and plants, meaning that animals and plants arose relatively late in the complex
and fascinating eukaryotic pedigree. With genome data, we can position the
many different single-celled eukaryotes in the tree of life and identify our closest
relatives (Figure 1–35). Scientists are using this information to probe the origins
of multicellularity, with a focus on what these strange creatures can tell us about
our own evolutionary past.

Summary

Eukaryotic cells, by definition, keep most of their DNA in a separate membrane-
enclosed compartment—the nucleus. They have, in addition, an elaborate set of
other organelles, each carrying out different functions, such as the oxidation of
food-derived molecules and production of ATP in mitochondria. Eukaryotic cells
also contain a cytoskeleton for structural support and movements. There is com-
pelling evidence that mitochondria and, in plants and algae, chloroplasts evolved
from captured symbiotic bacteria, which explains why these organelles contain
their own DNA and ribosomes.
   Eukaryotic cells typically have 3–8 times as many protein-coding genes as bacte-
ria and archaea and often a thousand times more noncoding DNA. Although much
of this DNA is probably unimportant, some of it allows for great complexity in the
regulation of gene expression, as required for the construction of complex multicel-
lular organisms containing many different cell types.

MODEL ORGANISMS
Because all cells appear to have descended from a common ancestor, whose
fundamental properties have been conserved through evolution, the knowledge
gained from the study of one organism contributes to our understanding of all
others, including ourselves. It turns out that certain organisms are much more
accessible than others for study in the laboratory. Some reproduce rapidly and

=== Original PDF page 71 ===
32     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life



                                                      red algae
                                                                         Archaeplastida
                          Haptophytes
                                                                       Chlamydomonas





                                                                                 mosses
          Alveolates
                                                                           ﬂowering
           (including                                                                     plants
              ciliates)


                                                                                                   Excavates
                                                                                                        (including Euglena,
                                                                                                         Giardia, and Trichomonas)



 Stramenopiles
  (including
 diatoms and
  oomycetes)                                                                                      Fungi




                                                                                          Opisthokonts


                 Rhizaria
                                                                                       Animals
         (including foraminifera)                                                              (including hydra
                                                                            and humans)


                                          Amoebozoa
                                                   (including amoeba and
                                                       slime molds)

Figure 1–35 A eukaryotic tree of life based on genome comparisons. The lengths of the lines are proportional to the
extents of genome diversity, with broken lines indicating uncertain relationships. Note that animals and plants are separated
by many single-cell species (including the Excavates), suggesting that multicellularity arose independently several times during
eukaryotic evolution. (Adapted from F. Burki, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6:a016147, 2014.)


are easily manipulated using powerful genetic techniques. Others are transpar-
ent and readily develop in the laboratory from a fertilized egg to a multicellular
organism, so that one can readily trace how their cells behave to produce internal
tissues and organs.
   Over time, different groups of biologists have focused on studying a few cho-
sen species, which allows their knowledge and research tools to be pooled to gain
a deeper understanding than could be achieved if their efforts were spread over
many different organisms. Although the list of these representative, model organ-
isms is continually expanding, a few stand out in terms of the breadth and depth
of information that has been accumulated about them over the years—knowledge
that has been essential for our understanding of how all cells work. In this section,
we examine some of these organisms and review the benefits that each offers to
the study of cell biology and, in many cases, to the promotion of human health.
We begin with a discussion of some especially powerful strategies that scientists
have developed to understand the cell, and we shall see how these approaches
dictated the choice of model organisms.

Mutations Reveal the Functions of Genes

Without additional information, no amount of gazing at genome sequences will
reveal the functions of genes. We may recognize that gene B is like gene A, but
how do we discover the function of gene A in the first place? And even if we know

=== Original PDF page 72 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         33


the function of gene A, how do we test whether the function of gene B is truly
the same as the sequence similarity suggests? How do we connect the world of
abstract genetic information that was introduced in the previous sections with the
world of living cells and organisms?
   The analysis of gene functions depends on two highly complementary
approaches: biochemistry and genetics. Biochemistry directly examines the
functions of purified molecules, such as the protein and RNA produced from a
specific gene: first we obtain that molecule from an organism and then study its
chemical activities in detail. In contrast, genetics starts with the study of mutants:                                   5 µm
we either find or make an organism in which the specific gene is altered, and we
then examine the effects on the mutant organism’s structure and performance     Figure 1-36 An alteration in organism
                                                                                shape resulting from a gene mutation.
(Figure 1–36). When combined with biochemistry, careful studies of an organ-    Scanning electron micrographs (discussed
ism (and its isolated cells) mutated for a particular protein or RNA molecule can      in Chapter 9) of a normal yeast (of the
reveal the biological role of that molecule.                                                 species Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
   Biochemistry and genetics, used in combination with cell biology, provide    compared with a mutant yeast, where a
                                                                                     change in a single gene has converted thea powerful way to connect genes and molecules directly to cell and organism                                                                                                                                cell from a cigar shape (left) to a T shape
structure and function. In recent years, DNA sequence information and the       (right). The mutant gene therefore has a
powerful tools of molecular biology have greatly accelerated progress in this     function controlling cell shape. But how, in
endeavor. From sequence comparisons, we can often identify particular subre-     molecular terms, does the gene product
gions within a gene that have been conserved nearly unchanged over the course     perform that function? That is a harder
                                                                                                      question, and it needs biochemical analysisof evolution. These subregions are often the most important parts of the gene                                                                                                          to answer it. (Courtesy of Kenneth Sawin
in terms of function. We can test their individual contributions to the gene’s    and Paul Nurse.)
function by creating in the laboratory mutations of specific sites within the sub-
region or by constructing artificial hybrid genes that combine part of one gene
with parts of another. Organisms can be engineered to make either the RNA or
protein specified by the gene in large quantities to facilitate biochemical anal-
ysis. Specialists in molecular structure can determine the three-dimensional
conformation of the gene product, revealing the exact position of every atom in
it. Biochemists can determine how each of the parts of the genetically specified
molecule contributes to its chemical behavior and function in a test tube. Cell
biologists determine the many other molecules that interact with the molecule
of interest and where all these molecules are located within a cell. And they also
analyze the behavior of cells that are engineered to express a mutant version of
the gene.
   There is, however, no one simple universal recipe for discovering a gene’s
function. We may discover, for example, that the product of a given gene is an
enzyme that catalyzes a certain chemical reaction, and yet have no idea how or
why that reaction is important to the organism. The functional characterization of
each new gene product or family of gene products, unlike the description of the
gene sequences, presents a fresh challenge to the biologist’s ingenuity. Moreover,
we will never fully understand the function of a gene until we learn its role in
the life of the organism, which means studying whole organisms, not just isolated
molecules or cells.

Molecular Biology Began with a Spotlight on One Bacterium
and Its Viruses

Because living organisms are so complex, the more we learn about any particular
species, the more attractive it becomes as an object for further study. Each discov-
ery in such a chosen organism raises new questions and provides new tools with
which to tackle general biological questions. For this reason, large communities
of biologists have become dedicated to studying different aspects of the same
model organism.
   In the early days of molecular biology, the chosen model was the bacterium
Escherichia coli (E. coli—see Figure 1–11B). This small, rod-shaped cell normally
lives in the gut of humans and other vertebrates, but it can be grown easily in
a simple nutrient broth in a culture bottle or dish, where under favorable con-
ditions, it can reproduce every 20 minutes or so. It adapts to variable chemical
conditions and can evolve by mutation and selection at a remarkable speed.

=== Original PDF page 73 ===
34     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


Also of special early interest were a few of the viruses that infect this bacterium—
inasmuch as their much smaller genomes made them even easier to analyze
in detail.
   Viruses are small packets of genetic material that have evolved as parasites
that depend on the reproductive and biosynthetic machinery of the host cells
they infect. Viruses are not strictly alive, because they depend on the machinery
of their host cells for their reproduction. Although we now know that viruses are
the most abundant—in terms of sheer numbers—of all the biological entities on
this planet, they are too small to be seen in the light microscope. For this rea-
son, they were completely missed until the end of the nineteenth century, when a
few viruses were identified as infectious agents that pass through filters that trap
bacteria, but are retained by the even-finer filters that allow large molecules to
pass. Only with the invention of the electron microscope could viruses finally
be visualized as tiny particles with defined shapes and sizes. We now know that
viruses consist of many families, with different families having distinct structures
and modes of replication (discussed in Chapters 6 and 23).
   Those viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages, and two that infect
E. coli have played critical roles as model organisms that advanced our under-
standing of molecular cell biology. Detailed genetic analyses of these two viruses,
bacteriophage lambda and bacteriophage T4, came first, followed by biochem-
istry that used the analysis of mutant genes to identify and characterize specific
proteins of interest. Geneticists, for example, generated and then characterized
more than a hundred different mutant genes in bacteriophage T4, a large virus
with a double-strand DNA genome (Figure 1–37). Sets of T4 genes that encode
components of the head and the tail of the bacteriophage were identified, allow-
ing biochemical studies to reveal important principles of biological assembly
processes. Similarly, a set of T4 genes that geneticists showed were essential for T4





                                                                                             Figure 1–37 The T4 bacteriophage.
                                                                                                                         (A) An electron micrograph of particles of
                                                                                                    the T4 bacteriophage, a virus that infects
                                                                                                          E. coli bacteria. The hexagonal head of
                                                                                                    the virus contains the viral DNA; the tail
                                                                                                   contains the apparatus for injecting the
                                                                   DNA into a host bacterium. (B) A cross
      (A)                                                  (B)                                                 section of an E. coli bacterium with a T4
                                 100 nm                                     100 nm          bacteriophage attached to its surface. The
                                                                                                           large dark objects inside the bacterium
                                                                                                     are the assembling heads of new T4
                                                                                                                    particles. When the particles are mature,
                                                                                                    the bacterium will burst open and release
                                                                                           them. (C–E) The process of DNA injection
                                                                                                                  into the bacterium, as visualized in
                                                                                                     unstained, frozen samples by cryo-electron
                                                                                          microscopy (discussed in Chapter 9).
                                                                                                                  (C) Attachment begins. (D) Attached state
                                                                                                    during DNA injection. (E) Virus head has
                                                                                          emptied its entire DNA into the bacterium.
                                                                                                                     (A, courtesy of James Paulson; B, courtesy
                                                                                                              of Jonathan King and Erika Hartwig from
                                                                                        G. Karp, Cell and Molecular Biology,
                                                                                 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
                                                                                          1999. With permission from John Wiley
      (C)                             (D)                                 (E)                         & Sons; C–E, courtesy of Ian Molineux,
                                                                         100 nm                University of Texas at Austin, and Jun Liu.)

=== Original PDF page 74 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         35


DNA replication allowed those proteins to be purified, so that biochemists could
decipher the central mechanisms of DNA replication in a test tube. In the same
way, it was extensive studies of bacteriophage lambda that led to our early under-
standing of transcription regulators and gene regulatory networks (see Panel 7–1
on pp. 404–405 and Figure 7–43).
  We now know that these two bacteriophages have many close relatives dis-
tributed throughout the biosphere. Relatives of bacteriophage T4, for example,
are abundant in the ocean, where they infect the ubiquitous marine cyanobac-
teria. As a whole, ocean viruses are present in enormous numbers, estimated
at 1030. If lined up end to end, they would extend beyond our nearest galaxies;
they kill approximately 20% of the total ocean microbial biomass per day. Because
these viruses have such a huge role in nutrient recycling, they profoundly affect
Earth’s ecology.
   Although not themselves living cells, viruses often serve as vectors for gene
transfer between cells. A virus will replicate in one cell, emerge from it with a
protective wrapping, and then enter and infect another cell, which may be of the
same or different species. Often, the infected host cell is killed by the massive
proliferation of virus particles inside it, but sometimes the viral DNA, instead of
directly generating new virus particles, may persist in its host for many cell gen-
erations as a relatively innocuous passenger—either as a separate intracellular
fragment of DNA, known as a plasmid, or as a DNA sequence inserted into the
cell’s own genome. In their travels, viruses can accidentally pick up fragments of
DNA from the genome of one host cell and ferry them into another cell. Such
transfers of genetic material are very common in prokaryotes.
  Many bacterial and archaeal species have a remarkable capacity to take up
even nonviral DNA molecules from their surroundings and thereby capture the
genetic information these molecules carry. By this route or by virus-mediated
gene transfer, bacteria and archaea in the wild can acquire genes from neigh-
boring cells relatively easily. Genes that confer resistance to an antibiotic or an
ability to produce a toxin, for example, can be transferred from species to spe-
cies and provide the recipient bacterium with a selective advantage, greatly
enhancing its rate of spread. In this way, new and sometimes dangerous strains
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria have been observed to evolve in the bacterial
ecosystems that inhabit hospitals or various niches in the human body. On
a longer time scale, the results can be even more profound; it has been esti-
mated that at least 18% of all the genes in the present-day genome of E. coli
have been acquired by horizontal transfer from another species within the past
100 million years.

The Focus on E. coli as a Model Organism Has Accelerated
Many Subsequent Discoveries

The standard laboratory strain E. coli K-12 has a genome of approximately 4.6 mil-
lion nucleotide pairs contained in a single circular molecule of DNA that codes
for about 4300 different kinds of proteins (Figure 1–38). In molecular terms, we
probably have a more complete understanding of E. coli than of any other living
organism. Most of our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of life—
for example, how cells replicate their DNA or how they decode the instructions
represented in the DNA to direct the synthesis of specific RNAs and proteins—
initially came from studies of E. coli and its viruses. This is because the basic
genetic mechanisms have turned out to be highly conserved throughout evolu-
tion and are essentially the same in our own cells as in E. coli.
     It should be noted that, as with other bacteria, different strains of E. coli,
though classified as members of a single species, differ genetically to a much
greater degree than do different varieties of an organism such as a plant or ani-
mal. One E. coli strain may possess many hundreds of genes that are absent from
another, and the two strains could have as little as 50% of their genes in common.
These differences are largely the result of rampant horizontal gene transfer, char-
acteristic of this and many other bacterial and archaeal species.

=== Original PDF page 75 ===
36     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life





origin of
replication





                                  (A)
                                        Escherichia coli K-12     1 μm
                                   4,639,221 nucleotide pairs


                                                                                       terminus of
                                                                                                  replication




   (B)


Figure 1–38 The genome of E. coli. (A) A cluster of E. coli cells viewed in a scanning electron
microscope. (B) A diagram of the genome of E. coli strain K-12. The diagram is circular because
the DNA of E. coli, like that of most other bacteria, forms a single, closed loop. Protein-coding
genes are shown as yellow or orange bars, depending on the DNA strand from which they are
transcribed; RNA molecules produced from nonprotein-coding genes are indicated by green
arrows, with the arrowheads indicating their direction of transcription. Some genes are transcribed
from one strand of the DNA double helix (in a clockwise direction in this diagram), others from the
other strand (counterclockwise). The origin and terminus of DNA replication are marked with red
arrowheads. (A, Dr. Tony Brain & David Parker/Science Source; B, adapted from F.R. Blattner et al.,
Science 277:1453–1462, 1997.)


A Yeast Serves as a Minimal Model Eukaryote

The molecular and genetic complexity of eukaryotes is daunting, and biologists
need to concentrate their limited resources on a small number of selected model
organisms to unravel this complexity.
   To analyze the internal workings of the eukaryotic cell without the additional
problems of multicellular development, it makes sense to use a single-cell species
that is as simple as possible. The popular choice for this role of minimal model
eukaryote has been the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Figure 1–39)—the same
species that is used by brewers of beer and bakers of bread.
    S. cerevisiae is a small, single-cell member of the kingdom of fungi and, in terms
of its genome sequence, much more closely related to animals than to plants (see
Figure 1–35). It is robust and easy to grow in a simple nutrient medium. Like other
fungi, it has a tough cell wall, is relatively immobile, and possesses mitochon-
dria but not chloroplasts. When nutrients are plentiful, it grows and divides about
every hundred minutes. It can reproduce either vegetatively (that is, by ordinary
cell division, or mitosis), or sexually: two yeast cells that are haploid (possessing
a single copy of each chromosome, n = 1) can fuse to create a cell that is dip-
loid (containing two copies of each chromosome, n = 2), and the diploid cell
can undergo meiosis (a reduction division) to produce cells that are once again

=== Original PDF page 76 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         37




                                                                                                                   cell wall

                                                                                          Golgi stack


                                                                                          nucleus




                                                                                    mitochondrion


                                                                                      ribosomes



(A)                                                       (B)                                                     plasma membrane                                     10 µm                                1 µm

Figure 1–39 The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. (A) A scanning electron micrograph of a
cluster of yeast cells. This species is also known as budding yeast, because it proliferates by
forming a protrusion, or bud, that enlarges and then separates from the mother cell. Many cells with
buds are visible in this micrograph. (B) An electron micrograph of a cross section of a yeast cell,
showing its plasma membrane and thick cell wall, as well as some of its intracellular organelles.
(A, courtesy of Ira Herskowitz and Eric Schabtach; B, courtesy of Andrew Staehelin.)


haploid (Figure 1–40). In contrast to most animals, this yeast can therefore prolif-
erate either sexually or asexually, a choice that an experimenter can make simply                   2n
by changing the growth conditions.                                                                             2n
   In addition to these features, the yeast has a further property that makes it a                    proliferation
convenient organism for genetic studies: its genome, by eukaryotic standards, is                 of diploid cells
exceptionally small (see Table 1–2), yet it suffices for all the basic tasks that every                                                                                                       2n
eukaryotic cell must perform. Mutants are available for every gene, and thus the
consequence of missing each gene—one by one—can be observed under any                        meiosis and sporulation
environmental condition using the high-throughput procedures described in                        (triggered by starvation)
Chapter 8. Over the past 50 years, extensive studies of yeast cells carried out by
many laboratories have provided keys to crucial “eukaryotic-only” processes.          2n
These include the cell-division cycle (the critical chain of events by which the                            n n                                                                                                          n
nucleus and all the other components of a cell are duplicated and parceled out                                                                                                mating (usually          n
to create two daughter cells from one) and meiosis (the process through which       immediately after
an organism’s reproductive cells are formed). In addition, important insights into          spores hatch)
eukaryotic chromosome structure, the organization of the nucleus, the mecha-                                  spores hatch
nisms of gene expression, the formation of organelles, and the ways that proteins                   n
are secreted from cells have come out of the work on yeasts. Many of these fun-          n     proliferation
damental processes are so similar between yeasts and humans that a human                   of haploid
homolog of a yeast protein will often faithfully carry out its functions when artifi-                            cells
cially expressed in yeast cells.                                                            n         n

The Expression Levels of All the Genes of an Organism                      BUDDING YEAST LIFE CYCLE
Can Be Determined                                                                   Figure 1–40 The reproductive cycles of
                                                                                            the yeast S. cerevisiae. Depending onThe complete genome sequence of  S.  cerevisiae consists of approximately                                                                                                  environmental conditions and on details of
12,500,000 nucleotide pairs, including the small contribution (about 78,500 nucle-     the genotype, cells of this species can exist
otide pairs) of the mitochondrial DNA. This total is only about 2.7 times as much      in either a diploid (2n) state, with a double
DNA as there is in E. coli, and it codes for only about 1.5 times as many distinct pro-    chromosome set, or a haploid (n) state,
teins (see Table 1–2). The way of life of S. cerevisiae is similar in many ways to that     with a single chromosome set. The diploid
                                                                                            form can either proliferate by ordinary cell-
of a bacterium, and it seems that this yeast has likewise been subject to selection                                                                                                                  division cycles (mitosis) or undergo meiosis
pressures (for rapid proliferation, for example) that have kept its genome compact.     to produce haploid cells. The haploid
   Knowledge of the complete genome sequence of any organism—be it a yeast     form can either proliferate by ordinary
or a human—opens up new perspectives on the workings of the cell: many things      cell-division cycles or undergo sexual
that once seemed impossibly complex now seem to be within our grasp. Using     fusion with another haploid cell to become
                                                                                                                    diploid. Meiosis is triggered by starvation,
techniques described in Chapter 8, it is possible, for example, to monitor simul-                                                                                   and it gives rise to spores—haploid cells
taneously, the amount of mRNA produced from every gene in the yeast genome      in a dormant state, resistant to harsh
under any environmental condition. It is also possible to determine in real time     environmental conditions.

=== Original PDF page 77 ===
38     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


how the pattern of gene activity changes when conditions change. This type of
analysis can be repeated with mRNA prepared from mutant cells lacking any gene
we care to test, and, in this way, the influence of that gene on the expression of
all other genes can be observed. Although pioneered in yeast, this approach now
provides a way to reveal the entire system of controls that govern gene expression
in any organism, as long as its genome sequence is known and it can be manipu-
lated genetically.

Arabidopsis Has Been Chosen as a Model Plant

The large multicellular organisms that we see around us—the plants and
animals—seem fantastically varied, but, as we have seen, they are much closer
to one another in their evolutionary origins, and more similar in their basic cell
biology, than the great host of microscopic single-celled organisms we have been
discussing. Thus, while bacteria and archaea are separated by perhaps 3.5 billion
years of evolution, vertebrates and insects are separated by about 700 million
years, fish and mammals by about 450 million years, and the different species of
flowering plants by only about 150 million years (see Figure 1–35).
   Because of the close evolutionary relationship between all flowering plants (see
Figure 1–35), we can, once again, gain insight into the cell and molecular biology of
this whole class of organisms by focusing on just one or a few species for detailed
analysis. Out of the nearly 400,000 known species of flowering plants, molecular
biologists have chosen to concentrate their efforts on a small weed in the cabbage
family, the common wall cress Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1–41), which can be
grown indoors in large numbers and produces thousands of offspring per plant
after 8–10 weeks. Arabidopsis has a total genome size of approximately 135 million
nucleotide pairs, about 10 times the size of the yeast genome (see Table 1–2).
   Work on Arabidopsis has provided a deep understanding of numerous key
features of plants, including the mechanisms that cause flower development and
its coordination with the seasons, the ability to grow toward sunlight, cell-to-cell
signaling by hormones, and the special type of innate immune system that plants
use to ward off pathogens. Comparison of the developmental programs between
plants and animals has also highlighted some common principles, thereby allow-
ing a glimpse into the basic logic through which large, highly differentiated,
multicellular organisms evolved from single-cell ancestors.
                                                                                                                          1 cm
The World of Animal Cells Is Mainly Represented by a Worm, a Fly,                                                                                             Figure 1–41 Arabidopsis thaliana, the
a Fish, a Mouse, and a Human                                                      plant chosen as the primary model
                                                                                                           for studying plant molecular genetics.
Although plants make up 80% of the biomass on Earth and animals make up less     (Courtesy of Toni Hayden, FLS; and the
than 0.4% (see Figure 1–14), animals account for the majority of all named species    John Innes Foundation.)
of living organisms, and they are by far the most intensely studied. Five species have
emerged as the foremost model organisms for molecular, cell, and developmental
biological studies. In order of increasing body size, they are the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans, the fly Drosophila melanogaster, the zebrafish Danio rerio,
the mouse Mus musculus, and the human, Homo sapiens. Genome sequences
from many different individuals within each species have been determined.
   Caenorhabditis elegans (Figure 1–42) is a small, harmless relative of the
eelworm that attacks crops. With a life cycle of only a few days, an ability to sur-
vive in a freezer indefinitely in a state of suspended animation, a simple body


                                                                                             Figure 1–42 Caenorhabditis elegans,
                                                                                            the first multicellular organism to
                                                                                  have its complete genome sequence
                                                                                         determined. This nematode is only
                                                                                           about 1 mm long and normally lives in the
                                                                                                                                      soil. Most individuals are hermaphrodites,
                                                                                             producing both eggs and sperm.
                                                                                                  (Courtesy of Maria Gallegos, University
                                                                                       0.2 mm                of Wisconsin, Madison.)

=== Original PDF page 78 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         39


                  antennae                                     misplaced legs                     Figure 1–43 Drosophila melanogaster.
                                                                                                                          (A) A normal adult Drosophila fruit fly.
                                                                                                 Molecular genetic studies of this fly have
                                                                                                provided the main key to understanding
                                                                          how all animals develop from a fertilized
                                                                                   egg into an adult. (B) A mutant adult fly,
                                                                                                                             in which a mutation in a regulatory DNA
                                                                                      sequence has caused genes for leg
                                                                                                    formation to be abnormally activated in
                                                                                                         positions normally reserved for antennae;
                                                                                          as a result, legs have developed where
                                                                                          antennae should be. (A, Edward B. Lewis,
                                                                                             Courtesy of the Archives, California
                                                                                                                        Institute of Technology; B, courtesy of
                                                                                    Matthew Scott.)
 (A)                                                       (B)
                                 1 mm


plan, and an unusual life cycle that is well suited for genetic studies, it is an attrac-
tive model animal. C. elegans develops with clockwork precision from a fertilized
egg cell into an adult worm with exactly 959 body cells (plus a variable number of
egg and sperm cells)—an unusual degree of regularity for animal development.
We now have a minutely detailed description of the sequence of events by which
this development occurs, as the cells divide, move, and change their character
according to strict and predictable rules (see Figure 21–42). The genome of about
100 million nucleotide pairs codes for about 20,000 proteins, and many mutants
and other tools are available for testing gene functions. Although the worm has a
body plan very different from our own, the conservation of biological mechanisms
has been sufficient for the worm to be a model for many of the developmental and
cell-biological processes that occur in the human body. Thus, for example, studies
of the worm have been critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms that
mediate and regulate the many cell deaths that help control animal-cell num-
bers, both in normal development and during human cancer growth. This crucial
process, called programmed cell death or apoptosis, is the subject of Chapter 18.
In addition, studies in C. elegans first revealed many fascinating features of RNA
interference (discussed in Chapters 7 and 8). They have also provided key insights
into the ways neurons make their proper connections (discussed in Chapter 21)
and informed many additional areas of cell biology.

                                                                                                                              20 µm
Studies in the Fruit Fly Drosophila Provide a Key
to Vertebrate Development                                                          Figure 1–44 Giant chromosomes from
                                                                                                       salivary gland cells of Drosophila.
The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 1–43) has been used as a model for    Because many rounds of DNA replication
animal genetic studies for longer than any other organism; in fact, the foundations    have occurred without an intervening cell
                                                                                                                      division, each of the chromosomes inof classical genetics were built to a large extent on studies of this insect. Nearly                                                                                                these unusual cells contains more
100 years ago, for example, the fly provided definitive proof that genes—the abstract     than 1000 identical double-strand
units of hereditary information at the time—are carried on chromosomes, whose   DNA molecules, all aligned in register.
behavior had been closely followed with the light microscope during eukaryotic     This makes them easy to see in the
cell division but whose function was at first unknown. The proof depended on      light microscope, where they display a
                                                                                                              characteristic and reproducible pattern ofone of the many features that make Drosophila especially convenient for molecu­                                                                                           bands. Specific bands can be identified as
lar genetic studies—the giant chromosomes, which have a characteristic banded     the locations of specific genes: a mutant
appearance that is visible in some of its cells (Figure 1–44). Specific changes in the       fly with a region of the banding pattern
hereditary information, manifest in families of mutant flies, were found to correlate     missing or altered shows a phenotype
exactly with the loss or alteration of specific bands in the giant chromosomes.             reflecting loss of the genes in that region
                                                                                                               (not shown). Genes that are being
   In more recent times, Drosophila, more than any other organism, has shown us                                                                                                      transcribed at a high rate correspond to
how to trace the chain of cause and effect from the genetic instructions encoded in    bands with a “puffed” appearance (black
the chromosomal DNA to the structure of the adult multicellular body. Drosoph-     arrow). The bands stained dark brown in
ila mutants with body parts strangely misplaced (Figure 1–43) or mispatterned     the micrograph are sites where a particular
provided the key to the identification and characterization of the genes required     regulatory protein is bound to the DNA;
                                                                                                    the regulatory protein is identified by the
to make a properly structured body, with gut, limbs, eyes, and all the other parts                                                                                                    binding of a specific antibody. (From R.
in their correct places. Once these Drosophila genes were identified, scientists     Paro, Trends Genet. 6:416–421, 1990.
could identify homologous genes in vertebrates, and then test their functions     With permission from Elsevier.)

=== Original PDF page 79 ===
40     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life



 hours  0                  6                  16                 34                  67                 96                 284





      1 mm

    fertilized egg          16 cells               blastula              gastrula
                                                                                       neurula

Figure 1–45 The early stages of normal frog development. These drawings show the
development of a Rana pipiens tadpole from a fertilized egg. The entire process takes place
outside the mother, making the mechanisms involved readily accessible for experimental studies.                     tail bud
(From W. Shumway, Anat. Rec. 78:139–147, 1940. With permission from John Wiley & Sons.)


there by analyzing mice in which the genes had been mutated. The results have
revealed an astonishing degree of similarity in the molecular mechanisms that
govern insect and vertebrate development (discussed in Chapter 21).
   The majority of all named species of living organisms are insects. Even if
Drosophila had nothing in common with vertebrates, but only with insects, it
would still be an important model organism. But, if understanding the molecular
genetics of vertebrates is the goal, why not simply tackle the problem head-on in
vertebrates, instead of sidling up to it obliquely through studies in Drosophila?
   There are many reasons. Drosophila requires only 9 days to progress from a
fertilized egg to an adult; it is vastly easier and cheaper to breed than any ver-
tebrate, and its genome is much smaller—about 180 million nucleotide pairs,
compared with about 3.1 billion for a human (see Table 1–2). Its genome codes
for about 14,000 proteins, and mutants are now available for essentially any gene.
In addition to its foundational contributions to animal development, research on                                    tadpole
Drosophila continues to uncover many other insights into biology, ranging from
deeply conserved mechanisms that neutralize pathogens to ways that external
stimuli from the environment are processed in the brain.

The Frog and the Zebrafish Provide Highly Accessible
Vertebrate Models

Frogs have long been used to study the early steps of embryonic development
in vertebrates. Because their eggs are big, easy to manipulate, and fertilized out-
side of the animal, the subsequent development of the early embryo can be easily
followed (Figure 1–45). Xenopus laevis, the African clawed frog, continues to
be an important model organism (Movie 1.6 and see Movie 21.1). Although the
species is poorly suited for genetic analysis, cytoplasm isolated from unfertilized
Xenopus eggs has the remarkable ability to recapitulate the formation of cellular
structures and organelles in a test tube. These egg extracts allow powerful bio-
chemical approaches to study such fundamental processes as the cell division
cycle, described in Chapter 17.
   The zebrafish Danio rerio, in contrast, is well suited for genetic analysis.
Its genome is compact—only half as big as that of a mouse or a human (see
Table 1–2)—and it has a generation time of only about 3 months, which is much


Figure 1–46 Zebrafish as a model for studies of vertebrate development. (A) These small,          (A)
hardy tropical fish are found in many home aquaria and are convenient for laboratory genetic                                          1 cm
studies. They are ideal for developmental studies as their embryos develop outside of the
mother and are transparent, so one can observe cells and internal structures in the living
organism throughout its development from an egg to an adult. (B) In this fluorescence image of
a 2-day-old embryo, a red fluorescent protein marks the developing blood vessels, and a green
fluorescent protein marks the developing lymphatic vessels; regions where the two markers
coincide appear yellow. (A, courtesy of Steve Baskauf; B, from H.M. Jung et al., Development           (B)
144:2070–2081, 2017. With permission from The Company of Biologists.)                                                         1 mm

=== Original PDF page 80 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         41


shorter than that of Xenopus laevis. Many mutants are available, and genetic
manipulation is relatively simple. The zebrafish has the added virtue that it is trans-
parent for the first 2 weeks of its life, so behavior of specific tissues and individual
cells can easily be followed in the living organism as it develops (Figure 1–46; see
Movie 21.2). All this has made it an increasingly important model vertebrate, one
that has been especially crucial for understanding the development of the heart
and the circulatory system, as discussed in Chapter 22.

The Mouse Is the Predominant Mammalian Model Organism

In terms of genome size and function, cell biology, and molecular mechanisms,
mammals are a highly uniform group of organisms. Even anatomically, the dif-
ferences among mammals are chiefly a matter of size and proportions; it is hard
to think of a human body part that does not have a counterpart in elephants and
mice, and vice versa. Evolution plays freely with quantitative features, but it does
not readily change the logic of the basic structure.
  Mammals have typically about 1.5 times as many protein-coding genes as
Drosophila, a genome that is about 16 times larger, and an adult body made
up of millions or billions of times as many cells. For an exact measure of how
closely mammalian species resemble one another genetically, we can compare
the nucleotide sequences of corresponding (orthologous) genes or the amino
acid sequences of the proteins that these genes encode. The results for individ-
ual genes and proteins vary widely. But typically, if we line up the amino acid
sequence of a human protein with that of the orthologous protein from, say, an
elephant, more than 80% of the amino acids are identical. A similar comparison
between human and bird shows an amino acid identity of about 70%—because
the bird and mammalian lineages have had longer to diverge than those of the
elephant and the human, they have accumulated more differences (Figure 1–47).



                       0                    human/chimp      100
                                            human/orangutan   98
                                      Tertiary         mouse/rat          84
                                                  cat/dog            86                           Figure 1–47 Times of divergence of                      50
                                                 pig/whale          77                               different vertebrates. The scale on the left
                                                  pig/sheep          87                        shows the estimated date and geological
                                               human/rabbit       82                             era of the last common ancestor of each                     100     Cretaceous
                                              human/elephant    83                                                                                                          specified pair of animals. Each time                                          human/mouse      89
                                               human/sloth        81                             estimate is based on comparisons of the
                     150                                                               amino acid sequences of orthologous
                                        Jurassic        human/kangaroo    81                                                                                                                                                              chain                           proteins;have had theto evolvelonger independently,the animals of thea pair
                     200                α                          smaller the percentage of amino acids that
                                          Triassic          bird/crocodile       76                           remain identical. The time scale has been                                           years                                                                                                           calibrated to match the fossil evidence
                 of 250                                                                 showing that the last common ancestor of                               Permian                                                                                                                                            hemoglobin                   mammals and birds lived about 320 million
                                                 human/lizard       57  in                                                                                                  years ago.                                                                     millions                     300
                 in                                              human/chicken     70                           The figures on the right show the amino
                               Carboniferous                                                         acid sequence divergence for one particular                                  time                                                                                                                                                                                                      identical                       protein—the α chain of hemoglobin. Note
                     350
                                             human/frog        56    acids                           that although there is a clear general trend                              Devonian                                                                 of increasing divergence with increasing
                                                                                                  time for this protein, there are irregularities
                     400                                                                                                                                                              amino                           that are thought to reflect the action
                                       Silurian
                                                                                                               of natural selection causing especially
                                                                                                        rapid changes in hemoglobin sequence                     450                    human/tuna ﬁsh    55                                                                                                                                                                                                                             percent                   when the organisms experienced special
                                Ordovician
                                                                                                          physiological demands. Some proteins that
                     500                                                                           are subject to stricter functional constraints
                                                                                                    evolve much more slowly than hemoglobin,
                              Cambrian                                                                                       whereas others evolve as much as five                                              human/shark       51
                     550                                                                        times faster. (Adapted from S. Kumar
                                 Proterozoic      human/lamprey     35                        and S.B. Hedges, Nature 392:917–920,
                                                                                                   1998.)

=== Original PDF page 81 ===
42     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


                                                                                             Figure 1–48 Similar mutations produce
                                                                                            the same effect in human and mouse.
                                                                                    The human baby and the mouse shown
                                                                                                here have remarkably similar abnormal
                                                                                                   white patches on their foreheads as a
                                                                                                                     result of a mutation in the same gene
                                                                                                                   (called Kit), which is required for the normal
                                                                                            development, migration, and survival of
                                                                           some skin pigment cells. (Courtesy of R.A.
                                                                                                Fleischman, from R.A. Fleischman et al.,
                                                                                                  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:10885–
                                                                                        10889, 1991.)





   The mouse, being small, hardy, and a rapid breeder, has become the foremost
model organism for experimental studies of mammalian molecular cell biology.
Many naturally occurring mutations are known, often mimicking the effects of
corresponding mutations in humans to a remarkable extent (Figure 1–48). More-
over, methods have been developed to test the function of any chosen mouse
gene or of any noncoding portion of the mouse genome by artificially creating
mutations in the relevant part of the gene or genome, as we explain in Chapter 8.
    Just one made-to-order mutant mouse can provide a wealth of information for
the cell biologist. It reveals the effects of the chosen mutation in various contexts,
simultaneously testing the action of the gene in the many different types of cells
in the body that could in principle be affected. Studies of the mouse are so fun-
damental to understanding mammalian biology that we will encounter them in
nearly every chapter of this book.

The COVID-19 Pandemic Has Focused Scientists
on the SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus

Having discussed several of the most prominent and well-studied model organ-
isms—which are based on the cell as their fundamental unit—we now turn to an
intensively studied virus. Viruses, which in essence feed on cells, are prevalent
in all three domains of life: bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. We introduced
them earlier in this chapter when we discussed several E. coli viruses that served
as critical experimental systems for the initial development of molecular biology.
Here, we focus on one prominent virus, SARS-CoV-2, that infects our own cells
and has, due to the widespread attention it has received from scientists, become
a model system for understanding eukaryotic viruses. But before discussing
this virus in detail, we consider how viruses—genomes packaged in protective
shells—first came to be, and how they have evolved over time.
   As described in Chapter 6, cells are believed to have first evolved in an “RNA
world,” before there were proteins or DNA molecules. Scientists suspect that even
at that time, parasitic genetic elements were present, in the form of small RNA
molecules that took advantage of more advanced replicating entities to prolif-
erate. These are believed to have been the ancestors of today’s smallest viruses,
which contain single-strand RNA genomes composed of as few as 3000 nucleo-
tides. Thus, virus-like entities have probably been a ubiquitous feature of life on
Earth for more than 3 billion years.
   At a minimum, a virus requires a genome that encodes two core functions: first,
a nucleic acid replication process that produces multiple copies of its genome
once inside its host cell, and second, a genome-packaging process that surrounds
these new genomes with a protective protein coat, while allowing the viruses to
exit the host cell and subsequently enter others. But the viruses present today
have evolved through billions of infectious cycles, during which there has been
a constant war between host organisms and the viruses—with host cells evolving

=== Original PDF page 82 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         43



                                                  spike protein (S)     E protein                   NONSTRUCTURAL     STRUCTURAL
                                                                                          PROTEINS            PROTEINS
                                                                                           Nsp1                           S
                                                                                               Nsp2             E
                                                                                                        Nsp3   M
                                                                                              Nsp4            N
                                                                                            Nsp5
                                                                                            Nsp6             ACCESSORY
                                                                                           Nsp7               PROTEINS
                                                                                           Nsp8                 Orf3a
                                                                                           Nsp9                 Orf3b
                                                                                            Nsp10                Orf6
                                                               RNA           Nsp11                 Orf7a
                                                         N protein                 Nsp12         Orf7b
                                                                                               Nsp13            Orf8
                                                                                                 viral membrane             Nsp14             Orf9b
                                     M protein                        Nsp15               Orf9c
                                                                                            Nsp16               Orf10
(A)                                                   (B)                                                              (C)
                          100 nm                                      50 nm

Figure 1–49 The coronavirus. (A) Electron micrograph of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles attached to the surface of a cultured
monkey cell. (B) A cut-away drawing of the virus that highlights its protruding spike protein molecules plus a few other major
proteins. The spike protein is the major target for vaccines that are designed to block infections, because it attaches the virus
to the outside of host cells and then catalyzes transfer of the viral genome into the cell interior. As indicated, the RNA genome
is packaged unevenly inside the enveloped virus particle. (C) The 29 proteins produced by SARS-CoV-2, grouped into three
different categories. The locations of the structural proteins S, M, E, and N in the virus are indicated in panel B. Each of the
proteins listed in the “accessory” category has a role in protecting the virus from host antiviral responses. The functions of
the nonstructural proteins include binding to ribosomes to block host protein synthesis (Nsp1), forming a double-membrane
“replication organelle” from host-cell membranes (Nsp 3, 4, and 6), and forming the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(Nsp 7, 8, and 12). The way in which the virus reproduces itself, once inside a host cell, is shown in Figure 5–62. (A, from
M. Laue et al. Sci. Rep. 11:3515, 2021. With permission from Cold Spring Harbor Press.)


multiple antivirus defenses and viruses evolving various ways to overcome these
defenses. As a result, through cycles of random mutation followed by natural
selection over long evolutionary times, most virus genomes have grown much
larger than needed for their two core functions, with many of the additional genes
encoding proteins that help the viruses to circumvent their host-cells’ defenses.
   Coronavirus genomes are large, single-strand RNA molecules, about 30,000
nucleotides long. This RNA is packaged in a protein coat that is covered with
a lipid bilayer envelope, from which protein spikes protrude (Figure 1–49A
and B). Many coronavirus strains circulate in animal species, including pigs, birds,
and bats. Some strains also circulate among humans; these so-called “endemic”
strains cause only mild symptoms and are responsible for about one in four com-
mon colds. But on rare occasions, a bat coronavirus mutates in a way that allows it
to infect humans, where it can cause very severe, even fatal, disease. It is thought
that the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 originated in this way.
   The  virus  that  causes COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, produces 29  proteins
(Figure 1–49C). Some are structural proteins that package the virus’s RNA genome
into the virus particle. The nonstructural proteins are critical for replicating the
viral genome inside of the host cell, as well as for ensuring that the viral genes are
appropriately translated into proteins, including the viral RNA polymerase com-
plex. And, as one would expect, other proteins help the virus to avoid the host’s
immune defenses, which are described in Chapter 24.
   The SARS-CoV-2 virus is closely related to the coronaviruses that cause
colds, as well as to the SARS-CoV virus that emerged from bats in 2002 and killed
nearly 1 in 10 of the humans it infected. We still do not understand what makes
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections so much more dangerous to humans than
the infections caused by their close relatives that cause only a mild cold. But,
given the thousands of research laboratories currently focused on understanding
the cell biology of SARS-CoV-2 with the aim of ameliorating the COVID-19 pan-
demic, we should know the answers to these questions in the near future. These
studies are certain to make us much better prepared to deal with the next virus
that emerges to threaten us.

=== Original PDF page 83 ===
44     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life

Humans Are Unique in Reporting on Their Own Peculiarities

As humans, we have a special interest in the human genome. We want to know
how our genes and their products work. But, even if you were a mouse, pre-
occupied with how mouse genes and their products work, humans would be
attractive as model genetic organisms because of one special property: through
medical examinations and self-reporting, we catalog our own genetic (and other)
disorders. The human population  is enormous, consisting today of some
8 billion individuals, and this self-documenting property means that a huge
database exists of human mutations and their effects. And the human genome
sequence of more than 3 billion nucleotide pairs has been determined for hun-
dreds of thousands of people, making it easier than ever before to identify at a
molecular level the precise genetic change responsible for any given human
mutant phenotype.
   But what precisely do we mean when we speak of the human genome?
Whose genome? On average, any two people taken at random will differ at roughly
4 million different sites in their DNA sequence (see Table 4–3, p. 247). Thus, the
human genome is very complex, embracing the entire pool of variant genes found
in the human population. As described in Chapter 4, knowledge of this variation
is helping us to understand human biology; for example, why some people are
prone to one disease, others to another, and why some respond well to a drug,
but others badly. It is also providing clues to our history, including population
movements, interbreeding among our ancestors, the infections they suffered, and
the diets they ate. All these things have left traces in the variant forms of genes
that survive today in the human communities that populate our planet, and
by exploiting this fact, scientists have been discovering fascinating aspects of
our past.
   By drawing together the insights from humans, mice, fish, flies, worms, yeasts,
plants, and bacteria—using DNA sequence similarities to map out the correspon-
dences between one model organism and another—we are greatly enriching our
understanding of them all.

To Understand Cells and Organisms Will Require Mathematics,
Computers, and Quantitative Information

Empowered by knowledge of complete genome sequences, we can list the genes,
proteins, and RNA molecules in a cell, and we have powerful methods to analyze
the complex web of interactions between them. But how are we to use all this
information to understand how cells work? Even for a single cell type belonging to
a single species of organism, the current deluge of data seems overwhelming. The
informal reasoning that biologists usually rely on seems increasingly inadequate
in the face of such complexity.
   The difficulty is more than just a matter of information overload. Biological
systems are, for example, full of feedback loops, and the behavior of even the
simplest of systems with feedback is remarkably difficult to predict by intuition
alone (Figure 1–50); small changes in parameters can cause radical changes in
outcome. To go from a circuit diagram to a prediction of the behavior of the


Figure 1–50 A very simple gene regulatory circuit. A single gene regulates its own expression                                protein-
because its protein product is a transcription regulator that binds to the regulatory DNA of its own             regulatory       coding
gene. Simple schematic diagrams such as this are found throughout this book. They are often             DNA          region
used to summarize what we know, but they leave many questions unanswered. When the protein
binds, does it inhibit or stimulate transcription from the gene? How steeply does the transcription
rate depend on the protein concentration? How long, on average, does a molecule of the protein
remain bound to the DNA? How long does it take to make each molecule of mRNA or protein, and                           mRNA
how quickly does each type of molecule get degraded? As explained in Chapter 8, mathematical
modeling shows that we need quantitative answers to all these and other questions—obtained
by direct observations and experiments—before we can predict the behavior of even this simple                                                                                                                                                   synthesis of
circuit. For different parameter values, the system may settle to a unique steady state; or it may                                             transcription
behave as a switch, capable of existing in one or another of a set of alternative states; or it may                                          regulator
oscillate; or it may even show large random fluctuations.                                                                                protein

=== Original PDF page 84 ===
MODEL ORGANISMS                                                                         45


system, we need detailed quantitative information, and to draw deductions from
that information we need mathematics and computers.
   Such tools for quantitative reasoning are essential, but they are not all-
powerful. You might think that, knowing how each protein in a cell influences
each other protein, and how the expression of each gene is regulated by the prod-
ucts of other genes, we should soon be able to calculate how the cell as a whole will
behave, just as an astronomer can calculate the orbits of the planets or a chemical
engineer can calculate the flows through a chemical plant. But any attempt to
perform this feat for anything close to an entire living cell rapidly reveals the limits
of our present knowledge. The information we have, plentiful as it is, is full of gaps
and uncertainties, and it is largely qualitative rather than quantitative. Most often,
cell biologists studying a cell’s control systems sum up their knowledge in simple
schematic diagrams—this book is full of them—rather than in numbers, graphs,
and differential equations.
   To progress from qualitative descriptions and intuitive reasoning to quantita-
tive descriptions and mathematical deduction is one of the biggest challenges for
contemporary cell biology. So far, the challenge has been met for only a few very
simple fragments of the machinery of living cells—subsystems involving a hand-
ful of different proteins, or two or three genes that regulate one another, where
theory and experiment go closely hand in hand. We discuss some of these exam-
ples later in the book and devote much of Chapter 8 to some new approaches
designed to answer the increasingly complex questions that arise in biology.
   Knowledge and understanding bring the power to intervene—with humans,
to prevent and treat disease; with plants, to create better crops; with bacteria,
archaea, and fungi, to control them for our own benefit. All these biological
enterprises are linked, because the genetic information of all living organisms is
written in the same language. The recent ability of molecular biologists to read
and decipher this language has already begun to transform our relationship to the
living world. The account of cell biology in the subsequent chapters will, we hope,
equip the reader to understand, and possibly to contribute to, the great biosci-
ences adventure that we can anticipate through the rest of this century.

Summary

Powerful new technologies, including rapid and cheap genome sequencing, are
enabling rapid advances in our knowledge of human biology, with implications
for understanding and treating human disease. But living systems are incredibly
complex, and simpler model organisms have played a critical part in revealing uni-
versal genetic and molecular cell biological mechanisms. Thus, for example, early
research on the bacterium E. coli and its viruses provided the foundations needed
to decipher the fundamental genetic mechanisms in all cells. And research on the
unicellular yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which continues to serve as a simple
model organism for eukaryotic cell biology, has revealed the molecular basis for
many critical processes that have been strikingly conserved during more than a bil-
lion years of eukaryotic evolution. Biologists have also chosen a small number of
multicellular organisms for intensive study: a worm, a fly, a fish, the mouse, and
humans serve as model organisms for animals, and a small member of the cabbage
family serves as a model for plant biology. Even today, research that focuses on
these and other model organisms remains crucial for understanding ourselves, as
well as for driving scientific and medical advances.

=== Original PDF page 85 ===
46     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life

PROBLEMS

Which statements are true? Explain why or why not.     1–7    You have begun to characterize a sample obtained
                                                   from the depths of the oceans on Europa, one of Jupiter’s
1–1   DNA and RNA use the same four-letter alphabet.    moons. Much to your surprise, the sample contains a life-
                                                   form that grows well in a rich broth. Your preliminary1–2    Each member of the human hemoglobin gene
                                                              analysis shows that it is cellular and contains DNA, RNA,
family, which consists of seven genes arranged in two clus-
                                                and protein. When you show your results to a colleague,
ters on different chromosomes, is an ortholog to all of the
                                                      she suggests that your sample was contaminated with an
other members.
                                                    organism from Earth. What approaches might you try to
1–3    Most of the DNA sequences in a bacterial genome    distinguish between contamination and a novel cellular
code for proteins, whereas most of the DNA sequences in    life-form that is based on DNA, RNA, and protein?
the human genome do not.                                                 1–8      It is not so difficult to imagine what it means to
1–4    Without additional information, no amount of gaz-    feed on the organic molecules that living things produce.
ing at genome sequences will reveal the functions of genes.    That is, after all, what we do. But what does it mean to
                                                           “feed” on sunlight, as phototrophs do? Or, even stranger, to
Discuss the following problems.                          “feed” on rocks, as lithotrophs do? Where is the “food,” for
                                                       example, in the mixture of chemicals (H2S, H2, CO, Mn+,
1–5     “Life” is easy to recognize but difficult to define.    Fe2+, Ni2+, CH4, and NH4+) that spews from a hydrother-
Dictionaries commonly define life as “The state or quality   mal vent?
that distinguishes living beings or organisms from dead
ones and from inorganic matter, characterized chiefly by   1–9   How many possible different trees (branching
metabolism, growth, the ability to reproduce, and the abil-    patterns) can be drawn to display the evolution of bacteria,
ity to respond to stimuli.” Score a car, a cactus, and yourself    archaea, and eukaryotes, assuming that they all arose from
with respect to these characteristics.                      a common ancestor?
1–6    Since it was deciphered more than five decades   1–10   The genes for ribosomal RNA are highly con-
ago, some have claimed that the genetic code must be a    served (relatively few sequence changes) in all organisms
frozen accident, while others have argued that  it was   on Earth; thus, they have evolved very slowly over time.
shaped by natural selection. A striking feature of the   Were ribosomal RNA genes “born” perfect?
genetic code is its inherent resistance to the effects of
                                                 1–11   Rates of evolution appear to vary in differentmutation. For example, a change in the third position of
                                                                lineages. For example, the rate of evolution in the rat lin-a codon often specifies the same amino acid or one with
                                                      eage is significantly higher than in the human lineage.similar chemical properties. The natural code resists muta-
                                                     These rate differences are apparent whether one looks attion more effectively (is less susceptible to error) than most
                                                     changes in nucleotide sequences that encode proteins andother possible versions, as illustrated in Figure Q1–1. Only
                                                           are subject to selective pressure or at changes in noncod-one in a million computer-generated “random” codes is
                                                           ing nucleotide sequences, which are not under obviousmore error-resistant than the natural genetic code. Does
                                                              selection pressure. Can you offer one or more possiblethe extraordinary mutation resistance of the genetic code
                                                          explanations for the slower rate of evolutionary change inargue in favor of its origin as a frozen accident or as a result
                                                          the human lineage versus the rat lineage?of natural selection? Explain your reasoning.
                                                 1–12   Genes participating in informational processes
               20                                       such as replication, transcription, and translation undergo
                                                            horizontal gene transfer between species much less often
               15                                         than do genes involved in metabolism. The basis for this                                                            (thousands)                                                             inequality is unclear at present, but one suggestion is that
                           codes 10       naturalcode                                                     it relates to the underlying complexity of the two types of
           of                                                processes. Informational processes tend to involve large
               5                                             aggregates of different gene products, whereas metabolic
                                                            reactions are usually catalyzed by enzymes composed of a               0                                 number                 0       5       10      15      20               single protein. Why would the complexity of the underly-
                               susceptibility to mutation                    ing process—informational or metabolic—have any effect
                                               on the rate of horizontal gene transfer?
Figure Q1–1 Susceptibility to mutation of the natural code shown
relative to that of millions of computer-generated alternative genetic      1–13   Animal cells have neither cell walls nor chlo-
codes (Problem 1–6). Susceptibility measures the average change in
                                                                  roplasts, whereas plant cells have both. Fungal cells areamino acid properties caused by random mutations in a genetic code.
A small value indicates that mutations tend to cause minor changes.     somewhere in between; they have cell walls but lack chlo-
(Data courtesy of Steve Freeland.)                                     roplasts. Are fungal cells more likely to be animal cells that

=== Original PDF page 86 ===
REFERENCES                                                                              47


gained the ability to make cell walls or to be plant cells
that lost their chloroplasts? This question represented a                                                                            VERTEBRATES
difficult issue for early investigators who sought to assign
                                                                                             Whale
evolutionary relationships solely on the basis of cell char-                                  Rabbit
                                                                                                Chicken        Cat
acteristics and morphology. How do you suppose that this                     Cobra                                                                           Salamander                Human
question was eventually decided?                                                       Cow
                                                                                   Frog
1–14   Giardia lamblia is a fascinating eukaryotic par-
asite; it contains a nucleus but no mitochondria and no
discernible endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi apparatus—            Goldﬁsh
one of the very rare examples of such a cellular organization
among eukaryotes. This  cell organization might have                                                PLANTS    Barley
arisen because Giardia is an ancient lineage that sepa-
rated from the rest of the eukaryotes before mitochondria
were acquired and internal membranes were developed.     Earthworm                                                     Lotus
Or it might be a stripped-down version of a more standard                                                                            Alfalfa
eukaryote that has lost these structures because they are       Insect                                                Bean
not necessary for its parasitic lifestyle. How might you use
nucleotide sequence comparisons to distinguish between                                                                        Clam
these alternatives?
                                                                                                       Chlamydomonas                                                                      INVERTEBRATES
1–15  When plant hemoglobin genes were first discov-                                                                           Nematode
ered in legumes, it was so surprising to find a gene typical                                         PROTOZOA
of animal blood that it was hypothesized that the plant
                                                                                                       Paramecium
gene arose by horizontal transfer from an animal. Many
more hemoglobin genes have now been sequenced, and
a phylogenetic tree based on some of these sequences is     Figure Q1–2 Phylogenetic tree for hemoglobin genes from a variety
shown in Figure Q1–2.                                                   of species (Problem 1–15). The legumes are highlighted in green. The
                                                                          lengths of lines that connect the present-day species represent the
A.     Does this tree support or refute the hypothe-                                                                             evolutionary distances that separate them.
sis that the plant hemoglobins arose by horizontal gene
transfer?
B.     Supposing that the plant hemoglobin genes were
originally derived from a parasitic nematode, for example,
what would you expect the phylogenetic tree to look like?

REFERENCES
General                                                        Gibson DG, Benders GA, Andrews-Pfannkoch C . . . Smith HO
                                                                             (2008) Complete chemical synthesis, assembly, and cloningAlberts B, Hopkin K, Johnson A, et al. (2019) Essential Cell Biology,
                                                                                     of a Mycoplasma genitalium genome. Science 319,    5th ed. New York: Norton.
                                                                   1215–1220.
Barton NH, Briggs DEG, Eisen JA, et al. (2007) Evolution. Cold Spring
                                                                  Koonin EV (2005) Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics.    Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
                                                                     Annu. Rev. Genet. 39, 309–338.
Darwin C (1859) On the Origin of Species. London: Murray.
                                                                                Noller H (2005) RNA structure: reading the ribosome. Science 309,
Hall BK & Hallgrímsson B (2014) Strickberger’s Evolution, 5th ed.                                                                   1508–1514.
    Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
                                                             Watson JD & Crick FHC (1953) Molecular structure of nucleic
Lynch M (2007) The Origins of Genome Architecture. Oxford: Oxford                                                                                  acids: a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171,
    University Press.                                                                    737–738.
Madigan MT, Bender KS, Buckley DH et al. (2018) Brock Biology of
    Microorganisms, 15th ed. London: Pearson.
Margulis L & Chapman MJ (2009) Kingdoms and Domains: An        Genome Diversification and the Tree of Life
     Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life on Earth. San Diego:              Baker BJ, De Anda V, Seitz KW . . . Lloyd KG (2020) Diversity,
   Academic Press.                                                      ecology and evolution of Archaea. Nat. Microbiol. 5,
Moore JA (1993) Science as a Way of Knowing. Cambridge, MA:             887–900.
    Harvard University Press.                                                     Doolittle WF & Brunet TDP (2016) What is the tree of life. PLoS Genet.
                                                                                      12(4), e1005912.
The Universal Features of Life on Earth                Eme L, Spang A, Lombard J . . . Thijs JG (2017) Archaea and the
Blain JC & Szostak JW (2014) Progress toward synthetic cells. Annu.             origin of eukaryotes. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15(12), 711–723.
    Rev. Biochem. 83, 615–640.                                Hug LA, Baker BJ, Anantharaman K . . . Banfield JF (2016) A new
Brenner S, Jacob F & Meselson M (1961) An unstable intermediate             view of the tree of life. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16048.
    carrying information from genes to ribosomes for protein synthesis.      Kerr RA (1997) Life goes to extremes in the deep earth—and
    Nature 190, 576–581.                                                elsewhere? Science 276, 703–704.

=== Original PDF page 87 ===
48     Chapter 1:  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life


Woese C (1998) The universal ancestor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA           International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2001) Initial
    95, 6854–6859.                                                     sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409,
                                                                    860–921.
Eukaryotes and the Origin of the Eukaryotic Cell           Krupovic M, Dolja VV & Koonin EV (2019) Origin of viruses: primordial
                                                                                      replicators recruiting capsids from hosts. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17(7),Andersson SG, Zomorodipour A, Andersson JO . . . Kurland CG (1998)
                                                                    449–458.   The genome sequence of Rickettsia prowazekii and the origin of
    mitochondria. Nature 396, 133–140.                               Lander ES (2011) Initial impact of the sequencing of the human
                                                                genome. Nature 470, 187–197.Burki F, Roger AJ, Brown MW & Simpson AGB (2020) The new tree of
    eukaryotes. Trends Ecol. Evol. 35(1), 43–55.                        Lynch M & Conery JS (2000) The evolutionary fate and consequences
                                                                                     of duplicate genes. Science 290, 1151–1155.Carroll SB, Grenier JK & Weatherbee SD (2005) From DNA to Diversity:
    Molecular Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design, 2nd ed.        Masters PS (2006) The molecular biology of coronaviruses. Adv. Virus
    Maldon, MA: Blackwell Science.                                        Res. 66, 193–292.
Imachi H, Nobu MK, Nakahara N . . . Takai K (2020) Isolation of an            Prangishvili D, Bamford DH, Forterre P, . . . Krupovic M (2017) The
   archaeon at the prokaryote–eukaryote interface. Nature 577,               enigmatic archaeal virosphere. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15(12),
   519–525.                                                        724–739.
Spang A, Caceres EF & Ettema TJG (2017) Genomic exploration of        Reed FA & Tishkoff SA (2006) African human diversity, origins and
    the diversity, ecology, and evolution of the archaeal domain of life.            migrations. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 16, 597–605.
    Science 357(6351), eaaf3883.                                  The Arabidopsis Initiative (2000) Analysis of the genome sequence of
                                                                             the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 408, 796–815.
Model Organisms                                           The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium (1998) Genome sequence
                                                                                     of the nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology.Adams MD, Celniker SE, Holt RA . . . Venter JC (2000) The
                                                                       Science 282, 2012–2018.   genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 287,
   2185–2195.                                                              Tinsley RC & Kobel HR (eds.) (1996) The Biology of Xenopus. Oxford:
                                                                       Clarendon Press.Blattner FR, Plunkett G, Bloch CA . . . Shao Y (1997) The complete
   genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 277,             Weiss SR (2020) Forty years with coronaviruses. J. Exp. Med. 217(5),
   1453–1474.                                                     e20200537.
Goffeau A, Barrell BG, Bussey H . . . Oliver SG (1996) Life with 6000
    genes. Science 274, 546–567.