=== Original PDF page 1392 ===
                                                                                        1353



                                             C H A P T E R
The Innate and Adaptive
Immune Systems           24





As we discussed in Chapter 23, all living organisms serve as hosts for other spe-
cies, usually in relationships that are benign or even mutually helpful. But all                                                                 IN THIS CHAPTER
organisms, and all cells in a multicellular organism, need to defend themselves
against infection by harmful invaders, collectively called pathogens, which   The Innate Immune System
can be microbes (bacteria, viruses, or fungi) or larger parasites. The first line of
defense against pathogens is provided by the innate immune responses, which   Overview of the Adaptive
can include protective barriers, toxic molecules, and phagocytic cells that ingest                                                           Immune System
and destroy the invading pathogen. These and other innate immune defenses are
not pathogen specific, but they usually can prevent or halt an infection early; if                                                   B Cells and Immunoglobulins
they fail to do so, some organisms, including all vertebrates and some bacteria
and archaea (see Figure 7–81), can activate more sophisticated, powerful, and                                                              T Cells and MHC Proteins
pathogen-specific adaptive immune responses. In this chapter, we mainly discuss
the innate and adaptive immune systems of humans.
   The diverse cells of our innate immune system can respond directly to a patho-
gen, and some of them can then help activate adaptive immune responses. The
innate and adaptive immune responses then work together to help eliminate the
pathogen (Figure 24–1). Unlike the innate responses, our adaptive responses are
highly specific to the particular pathogen that induced them, and they depend on
white blood cells called B and T lymphocytes. B lymphocytes (B cells) secrete anti-
bodies that bind specifically to the pathogen. T lymphocytes (T cells) can either
directly kill cells infected with the pathogen (Figure 24–2) or produce secreted
or cell-surface signal proteins that stimulate other host cells to help destroy the
pathogen. Whereas innate immune responses are generally brief, the adaptive
responses provide long-lasting protection: a person who recovers from measles
or is vaccinated specifically against it, for example, is protected for life against
measles by the adaptive immune system, although not against other common
                                                                                             PATHOGENS
viruses, such as those that cause mumps or chickenpox.
   Both the innate and adaptive immune systems have evolved sensing mech-
anisms that enable the systems to recognize pathogens and their harmful                          INNATE
products, and distinguish them from both the host’s own cells and molecules and                     IMMUNE
from harmless or beneficial foreign organisms and their molecules. The innate                        RESPONSES
system relies on various sensor proteins to distinguish self from nonself by rec-
ognizing particular types or patterns of molecules that are common to microbes
but are absent or sequestered in the host. Our adaptive system, by contrast, uses          ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSES
unique genetic mechanisms to produce a virtually limitless diversity of related
proteins—receptors on T and B cells and secreted antibodies—that, among them,     Figure 24–1 Innate and adaptive immune
can bind almost any foreign molecule. This remarkable strategy enables our    responses. Innate immune responses are
                                                                                                        activated directly by pathogens and defend
adaptive immune system to react specifically against any pathogen, even if we                                                                                                                                                        all multicellular organisms against infection.
never encountered it before. However, it also requires that the system learn not      In vertebrates, pathogens, together
to react against self molecules or harmless foreign ones; if these learning mecha-     with the innate immune responses they
nisms fail, harmful autoimmune or allergic responses result.                                 activate, also stimulate adaptive immune
   In this chapter, we focus mainly on features of our immune responses that     responses, which then work together with
                                                                                                        innate immune responses to help fight the
distinguish them from other kinds of human cell and tissue responses. We begin                                                                                                                    infection. Whereas adaptive responses are
with innate immune defenses and then discuss the highly specialized properties      specific to a particular pathogen, innate
of our adaptive immune system.                                                         responses are not.

=== Original PDF page 1393 ===
1354   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems

THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                                                    virus
Our adaptive immune responses are slow to develop when we first encounter a
new pathogen. This is because the specific B cells and T cells that can respond to a
particular pathogen are initially few in number and must be stimulated to prolifer-
ate and differentiate before they can mount effective adaptive immune responses,
which can take days. By contrast, a single bacterium that divides every hour
can generate almost 20 million progeny in a single day, producing a full-blown                                    virus-infectedhost cell
infection. We therefore rely on our innate immune system to defend us against
infection during the first critical hours and days of exposure to a new pathogen.              innate immune
   In this section, we consider some of the strategies our innate immune system              responses
uses to recognize pathogens and to provide a first line of defense against them.

Epithelial Surfaces Serve as Barriers to Infection
Our first encounters with infectious organisms are typically at the epithelial sur-           antibody           T cell–mediated
faces that form our skin and line our respiratory, digestive, and genitourinary            response               response
tracts. These epithelia provide both physical and chemical barriers to invasion                                      T cell
by pathogens: tight junctions between epithelial cells bar entry between the cells,      B cell
and a variety of substances secreted by the cells discourage the attachment and
entry of pathogens. The keratinized epithelial cells of the skin, for example, form
a thick physical barrier, and the sebaceous glands in the skin secrete fatty acids
and lactic acid, which inhibit bacterial growth. In addition, epithelial cells in all
tissues, including those in plants and invertebrates, secrete antimicrobial mole-
cules called defensins. Defensins are positively charged, amphipathic peptides
                                                                                                   antibody
that bind to and disrupt the membranes of many pathogens, including enveloped
                                                                                                              uninfected     dead virus-infected
viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites.                                                                 host cell              host cell
   The epithelial cells that line internal organs such as the respiratory and diges-
tive tracts also secrete slimy mucus, which sticks to the epithelial surface and     Figure 24–2 Two classes of vertebrate
                                                                                          adaptive immune responses.makes it difficult for pathogens to adhere. The beating of cilia on the surface of                                                                                      Lymphocytes carry out both classes,
the epithelial cells lining the respiratory tract and the peristaltic action of the    shown here as responses to a viral
intestine also discourage the adherence of pathogens. Moreover, as we discuss in      infection. In one class, B cells secrete
Chapter 23, healthy skin and gut are normally populated by enormous numbers     antibodies that specifically bind to and
of harmless (and often helpful) commensal microbes, collectively called the flora,      neutralize an extracellular virus, thereby
                                                                                                    preventing the virus from infecting host
which compete for nutrients with pathogens; some also produce antimicrobial                                                                                                                             cells. In the other, T cells mediate the
peptides that actively inhibit pathogen proliferation. Commensal microbes also     response; in this example, they kill the
bring other benefits to their host: some of those in the gut, for example, help digest     virus-infected host cells. In both cases,
food and make several vitamins; some are also needed for the normal develop-     innate immune responses help activate
ment of the gut’s innate and adaptive immune systems.                                   the adaptive immune responses through
                                                                                       pathways that we discuss later.
Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) Recognize Conserved
Features of Pathogens

Pathogens do occasionally breach the epithelial barricades, in which case under-
lying nonepithelial cells of the innate immune system provide the next line of
defense. These cells sense the presence of pathogens largely through the use of
receptor proteins that recognize microbe-associated molecules that are either not
present or are sequestered in the host organism. Because these microbial mol-
ecules often occur in repeating patterns, they are called pathogen-associated
molecular patterns, or PAMPs (because the molecular patterns are shared with
commensal microbes, they are also called microbe-associated molecular pat-
terns, or MAMPs). PAMPs are present in various microbial macromolecules,
including nucleic acids, lipids, polysaccharides, and proteins.
   The diverse receptor proteins that recognize PAMPs are collectively called
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which not only bind to PAMPs but can
also activate intracellular signaling pathways that lead to the production and
secretion of various signal molecules that help fight the pathogen, as we discuss
shortly. Some PRRs are transmembrane proteins on the surface of many types of
host cells, where they recognize extracellular pathogens. On specialized phago-
cytic cells (phagocytes) such as macrophages and neutrophils, for example, they

=== Original PDF page 1394 ===
THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                               1355


                                                     fungal hyphae                                Figure 24–3 A scanning electron
                                                                                     micrograph of a mutant fruit fly that
                                                                                         died from a fungal infection. The fly
                                                                                                                                       is covered with fungal hyphae, as it
                                                                                                lacked Toll receptors, which help protect
                                                                                                  Drosophila from fungal infections. (From
                                                                                               B. Lemaitre et al., Cell 86:973–983, 1996.
                                                                                            With permission from Elsevier.)





                                                                           0.2 mm


can help mediate the uptake of the pathogens into phagosomes, which then fuse
with lysosomes to form phagolysosomes, where the pathogens are destroyed.
Other PRRs are located intracellularly, where they can detect intracellular patho-
gens such as viruses; these PRRs are either free in the cytosol or associated
with the membranes of the endolysosomal system (discussed in Chapter 13).
Still other PRRs are secreted and bind to the surface of extracellular pathogens,
marking them for destruction by either phagocytes or blood proteins that are part
of the complement system (discussed later).

There Are Multiple Families of PRRs

The first PRR identified was the Toll receptor in Drosophila, which was already
well known for its role in fly development (see Figure 21–16). It was later discov-
ered to be required also for the production of antimicrobial peptides that protect
the fly against fungal infections (Figure 24–3). Toll is a transmembrane glyco-
protein with a large extracellular domain that contains a series of leucine-rich
repeats. Soon it was discovered that both plants and animals have a variety of
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that function as PRRs in innate immune responses
against various pathogens. A human makes at least 10 different TLRs, each recog-
nizing distinct ligands: TLR3, for example, recognizes double-stranded viral RNA
in the endosomal lumen (Figure 24–4); TLR4 recognizes lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) on the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria; TLR5 recognizes the
protein that forms the bacterial flagellum; TLR7 and TLR8 recognize single-
stranded viral RNA; and TLR9 recognizes short, unmethylated sequences of
bacterial, viral, or protozoan DNA, called CpG motifs, which are uncommon in
vertebrate DNA.
   In addition to TLRs, humans use several other families of PRRs to detect
pathogens. One is the large family of NOD-like receptors (NLRs). Like TLRs,
NLRs have leucine-rich repeat motifs, but they are exclusively cytoplasmic and
recognize a distinct set of bacterial molecules. Individuals who are homozygous
for an inactivating mutation in the NLR gene NOD2 have a greatly increased risk
of developing Crohn’s disease, a chronic inflammatory disease of the small intes-
tine, thought to involve chronic immune responses against harmless commensal
gut microbes. Another family of PRRs consists of RIG-like receptors (RLRs), which
are members of the RNA helicase family of proteins. They are also exclusively
cytoplasmic and detect viral pathogens. A fourth family of PRRs consists of C-type
lectin receptors (CLRs), which are transmembrane cell-surface proteins that rec-
ognize carbohydrates (which is why they are called lectins) on various microbes;
they are called C-type because the binding to carbohydrate is dependent on
Ca2+. Table 24–1 summarizes some PRRs and their ligands and locations in cells.
Collectively, these and other PRRs act as an alarm system to alert the innate and
adaptive immune systems that an infection is brewing (Movie 24.1).

=== Original PDF page 1395 ===
1356   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



         (A)                         ligand-binding domains                                            (B)

              TLR


                                                                 bound
                                                                        double-stranded
                                                           RNA




     ENDOSOME                                                                             Figure 24–4 A Toll-like receptor.
     LUMEN                                                                                                         (A) The structure of human TLR3 is shown
                                                                                                               (green), bound to a double-stranded RNA
                                                                                             molecule (dsRNA; blue). The receptor
                                                                                                                                       is a transmembrane homodimer in the
                                                                             membrane of endosomes. The binding
                                                                   endosome              of dsRNA to the two horseshoe-shaped
                                                                membrane          domains on the lumenal side of the
                                                                               endosome brings the two cytosolic
                                                                                     domains together, allowing adaptor
          CYTOSOL                                                                                   proteins in the cytosol to assemble into
                                                                                       a large signaling complex, leading to the
                                                                                                 production of antivirus cytokines (not
                                                                                      shown, but discussed later). (B) The
                                                                                                                 crystal structure of a lumenal domain
                                                                                                              of the transmembrane receptor, which
                                                                                                   contains 23 conventional leucine-rich
                                                                                                       repeats, each of which contributes a β
                                              cytosolic domains                                             strand to the continuous β sheet (red) that
                                                                                                                      lines the concave surface of the structure.
                                                                                                                      (A, adapted from L. Liu et al., Science
  When a cell-surface or intracellular PRR binds a PAMP, it stimulates the cell    320:379–381, 2008; B, adapted from
to secrete a variety of cytokines and other extracellular signal molecules. Some of      J. Choe et al., Science 309:581–585,
these inhibit viral replication, but most induce a local inflammatory response that     2005. Both with permission from AAAS.
helps eliminate the pathogen, as we now discuss.                             PDB code: 1ZIW.)

Activated PRRs Trigger an Inflammatory Response at Sites
of Infection

When a pathogen invades a tissue, it activates PRRs on or in various cells of
the innate immune system, resulting in an inflammatory response at the site
of infection. Resident macrophages are usually the first cells to respond, and


 TABLE 24–1 Some Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs)

 Receptor   Location                 Ligand                                                Origin of ligand

                                                             Toll-like receptors (TLRs)

 TLR3      Endolysosomal system     Double-stranded RNA                                  Viruses

 TLR4      Plasma membrane          Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS); viral coat proteins     Bacteria, viruses

 TLR5      Plasma membrane           Flagellin                                                Bacteria

 TLR9      Endolysosomal system     Unmethylated CpG dinucleotides in DNA                 Bacteria, viruses, protozoa

                                            NOD-like receptors (NLRs)

 NOD2     Cytoplasm                Degradation products of peptidoglycans                 Bacteria

                                  Retinoic acid–inducible gene 1 (RIG)-like receptors (RLRs)

 RIG1      Cytoplasm                Double-stranded RNA                                  Viruses

                                          C-type lectin receptors (CLRs)

 Dectin1    Plasma membrane        β-Glucan                                            Fungi

=== Original PDF page 1396 ===
THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                               1357


they orchestrate the subsequent responses by secreting short-range signal
molecules that recruit other cells of the innate immune system. The inflam-
matory response involves changes in local blood vessels and is characterized
clinically by local pain, redness, heat, and swelling. The blood vessels dilate
and become permeable to fluid and proteins, leading to local swelling and an
accumulation of blood proteins, including some that aid in defense against
pathogens. At the same time, the endothelial cells lining the local blood
vessels are stimulated to express cell adhesion proteins, which promote the
attachment and escape of white blood cells, or leukocytes (see Figure 19–28),
adding to the local swelling; initially neutrophils escape, followed later by
lymphocytes and monocytes (the blood-borne precursors of macrophages—
see Figure 22–12).
   The activation of PRRs results in the production of a large variety of extra-
cellular signal molecules that mediate the inflammatory response at the site
of an infection. These include both lipid signal molecules, such as prosta-
glandins, and protein (or peptide) signal molecules called cytokines, which
mainly influence nearby cells. Some of the most important pro-inflammatory
cytokines are tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa), interferon-g (IFNg), a variety of
chemokines that recruit leukocytes, and various interleukins (ILs) that we dis-
cuss later, including IL1β, IL6, IL12, IL17, and IL18. In addition, a secreted PRR
(mannose-binding lectin) activates the complement system when the PRR
binds to a pathogen; fragments of complement proteins released during com-
plement activation stimulate an inflammatory response (discussed shortly; see
Figure 24–7).
  When activated by PAMPs, most cell-surface and intracellular PRRs stimulate
the production of multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines by activating intracellu-
lar signaling pathways that switch on transcription regulators, including NFκB,
to induce the transcription of the relevant cytokine genes (see Figure 15–63).
Some PRRs, however, can also stimulate pro-inflammatory cytokine production
by a different mechanism: when activated, several cytoplasmic NLRs assemble
with adaptor proteins and specific proteases of the caspase family (discussed
in Chapter 18) to form inflammasomes, in which the pro-inflammatory
cytokines such as IL1β and IL18 are cleaved from their inactive precursor
proteins by caspase-1. These cytokines are then released from the cell by uncon-
ventional secretion pathways. Inflammasomes closely resemble apoptosomes
in their assembly and structure, but, in apoptosomes, caspases are activated to
initiate an intracellular, proteolytic, caspase cascade that leads to apoptotic cell
death (see Figure 18–8).
   NLR-dependent inflammasome assembly can also be triggered in the
absence of infection if cells are damaged or stressed. Such cells produce damage-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), including those on altered or misplaced
self molecules, which can activate the relevant NLRs: the arthritis caused by uric
acid crystals formed in the joints of individuals with gout, who have abnormally
high uric acid levels in their blood, is a painful example.
   The inflammatory response  is amplified by various  positive feedback
loops. Activated macrophages, for example, secrete IL1β, which acts back on
macrophages to increase their production of more precursor of IL1β; at the same
time, other cytokines increase the assembly of inflammasomes that produce yet
more IL1β by cleaving its precursor. As another example, activated macrophages
secrete chemokines that recruit leukocytes that also secrete chemokines that
recruit more leukocytes, some of which are monocytes that mature into mac-
rophages, which can be become activated to drive more rounds of this positive
feedback cycle.
   Besides their local effects, pro-inflammatory cytokines can produce wide-
spread changes in the body. IL1β, IL6, and TNFα, for example, can act on
the brain hypothalamus, muscle cells, and fat cells to increase body tempera-
ture, producing a fever that helps some immune cells fight infection. These
cytokines can also stimulate the liver to secrete acute-phase proteins, such as
C-reactive protein, which binds to the surface of various pathogens, where it

=== Original PDF page 1397 ===
1358   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


recruits complement components that stimulate phagocytosis of the pathogen         dividing                    plasma
(discussed shortly). Because it increases several hundredfold, the increase in        bacterium     pseudopod   membrane
C-reactive protein is widely used clinically as a test for infection, inflammation,
and tissue damage.

Phagocytic Cells Seek, Engulf, and Destroy Pathogens

In all animals, the recognition of a microbial invader is usually quickly followed
by its engulfment by a phagocytic cell. In humans, these are usually macrophages,
which are long-lived cells that are resident in most tissues and are therefore
the  first phagocytes to respond. Neutrophils, by  contrast, are  short-lived
and, although they are the most numerous leukocytes in blood, they are not
present in other healthy tissues. They are rapidly recruited from the blood to sites
of infection by various attractive molecules, including formylmethionine-con-
taining peptides (which are released by microbes but are not made by mammalian
cells), chemokines secreted by activated macrophages, and peptide fragments
produced from cleaved, activated complement proteins. The recruited neutrophils
phagocytose the pathogens and secrete their own pro-inflammatory cytokines,
thereby amplifying the local inflammatory response.
   In addition to their PRRs, macrophages and neutrophils display a variety of
cell-surface receptors that recognize antibodies or fragments of complement pro-
teins bound to the surface of a pathogen. The binding of such a coated pathogen       phagocytic          secretory
to these receptors leads to its rapid phagocytosis (Figure 24–5) and the mount-       leukocyte            vesicles       1 µm
ing of a ferocious attack on the pathogen once it is inside a phagolysosome. Both        (neutrophil)
macrophages and neutrophils possess an impressive armory of weapons to kill     Figure 24–5 Phagocytosis of an
ingested invaders, including enzymes such as lysozyme and acid hydrolases    antibody-coated pathogen. Electron
that can degrade the pathogen’s cell wall. The cells assemble NADPH oxidase     micrograph of a neutrophil phagocytosing
complexes on the phagolysosomal membrane, where the complexes catalyze    an antibody-coated bacterium, which
                                                                                                                                       is in the process of dividing. The processthe production of highly toxic oxygen-derived compounds, including super-                                                                                                                             in which antibody (or complement)
oxide (O2–), hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals. A transient increase     coating of a pathogen increases the
in oxygen consumption by the phagocytic cells, called the respiratory burst,      efficiency with which the pathogen is
helps power the production of these toxic compounds. Whereas macrophages    phagocytosed is called opsonization.
generally survive this killing frenzy and live to kill again, neutrophils do not: they     (Courtesy of Dorothy F. Bainton, from
                                                                                             R.C. Williams, Jr., and H.H. Fudenberg,
are programmed to die by apoptosis (discussed in Chapter 18) after they have                                                                                              Phagocytic Mechanisms in Health and
destroyed their prey and are then phagocytosed by macrophages; some neu-     Disease. New York: Intercontinental
trophils die by a form of cell necrosis, releasing decondensed chromatin that     Medical Book Corporation, 1971.)
forms extracellular nets, which are thought to trap and kill pathogens. Dead and
dying neutrophils are a major component of the pus that forms in acute wounds         schistosome larva         eosinophils
infected with bacteria.
     If a pathogen is too large to be successfully phagocytosed (if it is a large
parasite such as a worm, for example), a group of macrophages, neutrophils, or
eosinophils (another type of leukocyte—see Figure 22–11) will gather around
the invader. They secrete defensins and other damaging agents and release the
oxygen-derived toxic products of the respiratory burst. This barrage is often
sufficient to destroy the pathogen (Figure 24–6).

Complement Activation Targets Pathogens for Phagocytosis
or Lysis
                                                                                                                           15 µm
The blood and other extracellular  fluids contain numerous proteins with
antimicrobial activity, some of which are produced in response to an infec-     Figure 24–6 Eosinophils attacking
                                                                                 a parasite. Phagocytes cannot ingest
tion, while others are produced constitutively. The most important of these are                                                                                                           large parasites such as the schistosome
components of the complement system, which consists of more than 30 inter-      larva shown here. When such a parasite
acting soluble proteins that are mainly made continually by the liver and are       is coated with antibody or complement
inactive until an infection or another trigger activates them. They were originally    components, however, eosinophils (and
                                                                                                     other leukocytes) can recognize it andidentified by their ability to amplify and thereby “complement” the action of                                                                                                                      collectively kill it by secreting a large variety
antibodies made by B cells, but some are also secreted PRRs, which directly      of toxic molecules. (Courtesy of Anthony
recognize PAMPs on microbes.                                                                   Butterworth.)

=== Original PDF page 1398 ===
THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                               1359


                       CLASSICAL        LECTIN        ALTERNATIVE                             Figure 24–7 The principal stages in
                   PATHWAY     PATHWAY       PATHWAY                          complement activation by the classical,
                                                                                                                 lectin, and alternative pathways. In                        C-reactive protein   mannose       pathogen
                         or antibody       binding          surfaces                                                     all three pathways, the reactions of
                          binding                                                        complement activation usually take place
                                                                                  on the surface of an invading microbe, such
                                MBL                                                as a bacterium, and lead to the cleavage of
                            C1                                MASP       B                              C3 and the various consequences shown.
                             C2                                                    As indicated, the complement proteins                                       C2      D
                              C4                                             C1 to C9, mannose-binding lectin (MBL),                                       C4
                                                                                         MBL-associated serine protease (MASP),
                                                                                   and factors B and D are the central                               CLEAVAGE OF C3
                                                                                   components of the complement system.
                                                                                    The early components are shown within
                COATING OF            C5            RECRUITMENT OF
                 MICROBES             C6         INFLAMMATORY CELLS                    gray arrows, while the late components
            AND INDUCTION          C7              (blood leukocytes)                       are shown within a brown arrow. The black
             OF PHAGOCYTOSIS          C8                                                  arrows indicate the functions of the protein
                                       C9         STIMULATION OF                          fragments produced during complement
                                                ADAPTIVE IMMUNE                               activation. The various complement
                                                    RESPONSES                                proteins that regulate the system are
                              PORE FORMATION                                               omitted. C-reactive protein is a secreted
                             AND LYSIS                                   PRR protein that is made by the liver; it
                                                                                                    increases in the blood during an infection
                                                                                                (and other inflammatory conditions) and
   The early complement components consist of three sets of proteins, belonging     binds to the surface of some bacteria.
to three distinct pathways of complement activation—the classical pathway, the
lectin pathway, and the alternative pathway. The early components of all three
pathways act locally to cleave and activate C3, which is the pivotal complement
component (Figure 24–7); individuals with a C3 deficiency are subject to repeated
severe infections. The early components are proenzymes, which are activated
sequentially by proteolytic cleavage. The cleavage of each proenzyme in the series
activates the next component to generate a serine protease, which cleaves the
next proenzyme in the series, and so on. Because each activated enzyme cleaves
many molecules of the next proenzyme in the chain, the activation of the early
components consists of an amplifying proteolytic cascade.
  Many of these protein cleavages liberate a biologically active small frag-
ment, which can attract neutrophils, plus a membrane-binding larger fragment.
The binding of the large fragment to a cell membrane, usually the surface of a
pathogen, helps stimulate the next reaction in the sequence. In this way, com-
plement activation is largely kept confined to the cell surface where it began.
In particular, the large fragment of C3, called C3b, binds covalently to the sur-
face of the pathogen. Here, it recruits protein fragments produced by cleavage of
other early complement components to form proteolytic complexes that catalyze
the subsequent steps in the complement cascade. The early events in comple-
ment activation have diverse functions: C3b-binding receptors on phagocytic
cells enhance the ability of these cells to phagocytose the pathogen, and similar
receptors on B cells enhance the ability of these cells to make antibodies against
various microbial molecules on C3b-coated pathogens. The smaller fragment of
C3 (called C3a), as well as small fragments of C4 and C5, act independently as
diffusible signals to promote an inflammatory response by recruiting leukocytes
to the site of infection.
   As indicated in Figure 24–7, C-reactive protein or antibodies bound to the
surface of a pathogen activate the classical pathway. Mannose-binding lectin, men-
tioned earlier, is a secreted PRR that initiates the lectin pathway of complement
activation when it recognizes bacterial or fungal glycolipids and glycoproteins
bearing terminal mannose and fucose sugars in a particular spatial conformation.
These initial binding events in the classical and lectin pathways cause the recruit-
ment and activation of the early complement components. Because molecules on
the surface of pathogens can directly activate the alternative pathway, it is usually
the first complement pathway activated at the start of an infection.
   Membrane-immobilized C3b, produced by any of the three pathways, triggers
a further cascade of reactions that leads to the assembly of the late complement

=== Original PDF page 1399 ===
1360   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                                                   C9                                      Figure 24–8 Assembly of the late
                                                                              complement components to form
                                           C8                       C6  C7                                                     n                             a membrane attack complex in the                                                              pathogen membrane                                                                         membrane of a pathogen. The cleavage
                                                                                                              of the early complement components
                              C6 C5b                                                    (shown within gray arrows in Figure 24–7)                  C5b
                                   C7                                                                  results in the formation of C3b-containing
                                                          transmembrane
                                                                                                               proteolytic complexes on the pathogen                                                           aqueous channel
                                          C6 C5b                                    membrane (not shown). These then cleave
                                              C7                                             the first of the late components, C5, to
                                                                                        produce C5a (not shown) and C5b. As
                                               C8         C9                                       illustrated, C5b rapidly assembles with C6
                                                                                   and C7 to form C567, which then binds
                                                                                                                         firmly via C7 to the pathogen membrane.
                                                                           One molecule of C8 binds to the complex
                                                                                                          to form C5678. The binding of a molecule
                                                                                                              of C9 to C5678 induces a conformational
components to form membrane attack complexes. These protein complexes assem-    change in C9 that exposes a hydrophobic
ble in the pathogen membrane near the site of C3 activation, forming aqueous     region and causes C9 to insert into the
                                                                                                            target membrane. This starts a chain
pores through the membrane (Figure 24–8). For this reason, and because they                                                                                                         reaction in which the altered C9 binds a
perturb the structure of the lipid bilayer in their vicinity, they make the mem-    second molecule of C9, which can then
brane leaky and can, in some cases, cause the microbe to lyse.                          bind another molecule of C9, and so on.
   The self-amplifying, inflammatory, and destructive properties of the com-      In this way, a ring of C9 molecules forms a
plement cascade make it essential that the cascade is tightly controlled, which is      large, transmembrane aqueous channel in
                                                                                                    the pathogen membrane.
achieved in various ways. One way is that key activated components are unstable
and rapidly inactivate after they are generated, unless they bind immediately to
either the next component in the cascade or to a nearby membrane. In addition,
specific inhibitor proteins in the blood or on the surface of host cells abort the
cascade by inactivating certain complement components once the components
have been activated by proteolytic cleavage. One such inhibitor protein in the
blood is recruited to sialic acid on host-cell glycoproteins and glycolipids (see
Figure 10–16); because pathogens generally lack sialic acid, they are singled out
for complement-mediated phagocytosis and destruction, while host cells are
spared. Some pathogens, including the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae that
causes the sexually transmitted disease gonorrhea, coat themselves with a layer
of sialic acid to effectively hide from the complement system.

Virus-infected Cells Take Drastic Measures to Prevent
Viral Replication

A common way for a host-cell PRR to recognize the presence of an infecting virus
is to detect unusual elements of the viral genome, such as the double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) that is an intermediate in the life cycle of many viruses and is rec-
ognized by several PRRs, including the Toll-like receptor TLR3 (see Figure 24–4A).
In addition, DNA virus genomes frequently contain significant amounts of the
CpG motifs mentioned earlier, which can be recognized by TLR9 (see Table 24–1,
p. 1356).
  Mammalian cells are particularly adept at recognizing the presence of dsRNA,
which activates intracellular PRRs that induce the host cell to produce and secrete
two antiviral cytokines: interferon-a (IFNa) and interferon-b (IFNb). These
interferons are referred to as type I interferons to distinguish them from IFNγ,
which is a type II interferon and has different functions, as we discuss later. A type
I interferon acts in both an autocrine fashion on the infected cells that produced
it and a paracrine fashion on uninfected neighbors. Type I interferons bind to a
common cell-surface receptor, which activates the JAK–STAT intracellular sig-
naling pathway (see Figure 15–57) to stimulate the transcription of many specific
genes and thereby promote the production of hundreds of proteins, including
many cytokines, reflecting the complexity of the cell’s acute response to a viral
infection.
   The production of type I interferons appears to be a general response of our
cells to a viral infection, and viral components other than dsRNA and CpG motifs

=== Original PDF page 1400 ===
THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                               1361


in viral DNA can trigger it. The type I interferons help block viral replication in
multiple ways. They activate a latent ribonuclease, for example, that nonspecif-
ically degrades single-stranded RNAs of both the virus and host cell. They also
indirectly activate a protein kinase that phosphorylates and inactivates the pro-
tein synthesis initiation factor eIF2 (discussed in Chapter 6), thereby shutting
down most protein synthesis in the infected host cell. Apparently, by destroying
most of its own RNA and transiently halting most of its protein synthesis, the host
cell inhibits viral replication without killing itself. If these measures fail, the cell
takes an even more extreme step to prevent the virus from replicating: it kills
itself by undergoing apoptosis, often with the help of immune killer cells that are
activated by type I interferons, as we discuss next.

Natural Killer Cells Induce Virus-infected Cells to Kill Themselves

An indirect way that type I interferons block viral replication is by enhancing
the activity of natural killer cells (NK cells). These lymphocyte-like leuko-
cytes are part of the innate immune system. They are recruited early to sites of
inflammation by cytokines secreted by activated resident macrophages; once
there, they secrete cytokines that further activate macrophages to increase their
ability to ingest and destroy pathogens and secrete cytokines—yet another pos-
itive feedback loop that amplifies the inflammatory response. Like cytotoxic
T cells of the adaptive immune system (discussed later), NK cells also directly
destroy virus-infected cells by inducing the infected cells to kill themselves by
undergoing apoptosis. Thus NK cells help defend us against both extracellular
and intracellular pathogens. We consider later how NK cells induce apopto-
sis when we discuss how cytotoxic T cells do it (see Figure 24–43). Although
the two types of killer cells kill in the same ways, the means by which they dis-
tinguish the surface of virus-infected cells from that of uninfected cells are
different (Movie 24.2).
   Both cytotoxic T cells and NK cells recognize the same special class of cell-
surface proteins on a host cell to help determine if the cell is virus-infected, but
they use distinct receptors to do so. The special cell-surface proteins recognized
are called class I MHC proteins. As we discuss in detail later, MHC proteins are so
called because they are encoded by a cluster of genes in the major histocompat-
ibility complex. Class I MHC proteins are present on almost all nucleated cells in
vertebrates, and cytotoxic T cells use specific T cell receptors (TCRs) to recognize
peptide fragments of viral proteins bound to these MHC proteins on the surface       natural killer cell        cancer cell
of virus-infected host cells to induce the cells to undergo apoptosis (discussed
later). By contrast, NK cells have a variety of cell-surface inhibitory receptors that
monitor the level of class I MHC proteins on the surface of other host cells: the
high levels of these MHC proteins normally present on healthy host cells engage
these receptors and thereby inhibit the killing activity of the NK cells. The NK cells
thus focus primarily on host cells expressing abnormally low levels of class I MHC
proteins and induce the cells to kill themselves; these are mainly virus-infected
cells and some cancer cells (Figure 24–9). NK-cell killing activity is stimulated
when various activating receptors on the NK cell surface recognize specific pro-
teins that are greatly increased on the surface of virus-infected cells and some
cancer cells.
   The reason that class I MHC protein levels are often low on virus-infected                                5 µm
cells is that many viruses have developed a variety of mechanisms to inhibit
                                                                                             Figure 24–9 A natural killer (NK) cellthe expression of these proteins on the surface of the host cells they infect,                                                                                               attacking a cancer cell. This scanning
in order to avoid detection by cytotoxic T cells: some viruses encode pro-     electron micrograph was taken shortly
teins that block class I MHC gene transcription; others block the intracellular      after the NK cell attached to the cancer
assembly of peptide–MHC complexes; still others block the transport of these       cell, causing the cancer cell to undergo
complexes to the cell surface. By evading recognition by cytotoxic T cells in     apoptosis. The blebbing of the cancer cell’s
                                                                                       plasma membrane is characteristic of cells
these ways, however, a virus incurs the wrath of NK cells, which recognize                                                                                                 dying in this way (discussed in Chapter 18;
the infected cells as being different—both because the infected cells express    see Movie 18.1). (From Eye of Science/
little class I MHC protein and because they express large amounts of other     Science Source.)

=== Original PDF page 1401 ===
1362   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                 NK cell                               NK cell                      Figure 24–10 How an NK cell recognizes
                                                                                                                            its target. An NK cell displays a variety
                                                                                                              of activating and inhibitory receptors on
      inactive                                                                                active                 its surface, and the decision to kill or
      activating                                              inactive                        activating        not kill a host cell depends on the sum
     receptor                                               inhibitory                     receptor           of interactions between these receptors
                                                        receptor                                                                                   and the molecules they recognize on
    class I                           activated              activating                   KILLING           the host cell. One simplified example is
  MHC protein                     inhibitory            protein                               shown here. (A) The high levels of class I
                                   receptor                                   MHC proteins found on healthy host cells
                                                                                                             activate inhibitory receptors on the NK cell,
                                                                virus                                       suppressing the NK cell’s killing activity.
                                                                                                                     (B) In contrast, the high levels of activating
                                                                                                        proteins and abnormally low level of class
                                                                                                                                                                                                           I MHC proteins on infected cells stimulate
                                                           apoptotic virus-infected host cell             the NK cell to kill the virus-infected host
                  healthy host cell                                                                                      cell by inducing the host cell to kill itself by
                                                                                            undergoing apoptosis.
     (A) HEALTHY HOST CELL NOT KILLED                  (B)  VIRUS-INFECTED HOST CELL KILLED


cell-surface proteins that are recognized by the activating receptors on the
NK cells (Figure 24–10).
  NK cells belong to a large class of lymphocyte-like cells of the innate immune
system, collectively called innate lymphoid cells (ILCs); although these cells share
some characteristics with T cells, they lack TCRs. Besides NK cells, the ILCs
include more recently discovered cell types with diverse distributions and func-
tions: some promote the early development of lymphoid tissues; some secrete
various cytokines during innate immune responses to a wide variety of patho-
gens; others promote the repair of damaged tissues; and some help prevent
adaptive immune responses against commensal microbes in the gut. And new
ILCs and functions are still being discovered.

Dendritic Cells Provide the Link Between the Innate
and Adaptive Immune Systems

Dendritic cells are crucially important components of the innate immune system.
Like macrophages, they are made in the bone marrow, are resident in most of our
tissues, express a large variety of PRRs that enable them to recognize and phago-
cytose invading pathogens or their products, and they become activated during
the encounter with pathogens. But, unlike macrophages, which kill the patho-
gens they ingest, dendritic cells act indirectly to fight the pathogens they ingest by
activating T cells of the adaptive immune system to join the fight.
   As discussed later, an activated dendritic cell cleaves the proteins of the
ingested pathogen or its products into peptide fragments, which bind to newly
synthesized MHC proteins that then carry the fragments to the dendritic-cell
surface. The activated cells then migrate to a nearby lymphoid organ such as a
lymph node (also called a lymph gland), where they present the peptide–MHC
complexes to T cells, activating the T cells to proliferate and help fight the specific
pathogen (Figure 24–11).
   In addition to the complexes of MHC proteins and microbial peptides dis-
played on their cell surface, activated dendritic cells also display cell-surface
co-stimulatory proteins that help activate T cells (see Figure 24–11). The activated
dendritic cells also secrete a variety of cytokines that influence the type of T cell
response induced, ensuring that it is appropriate to fight the particular pathogen.
In these ways, dendritic cells serve as crucial links between the innate immune
system, which provides a rapid first line of defense against invading pathogens,
and the adaptive immune system, which mounts slower but more powerful and
highly specific responses to attack a particular invader, as we discuss next.

Summary

All multicellular organisms possess innate immune defenses against invading
pathogens; these defenses include physical and chemical barriers and various
defensive cell responses that are not specific to a particular pathogen. In vertebrates,

=== Original PDF page 1402 ===
THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                               1363



                                                     ACTIVATED T CELLS MIGRATE VIA LYMPHATIC
                                           AND BLOOD VESSELS TO SITE OF INFECTION,
                                              WHERE THEY HELP FIGHT THE PATHOGEN



         skin


                  MHC               remnants of pathogen              activated                     activated T cells
                            protein                in phagolysosome                   dendritic
                                                                                                         cell



     pathogens


                                                                         co-stimulatory
                                                                       protein
               dendritic cell
                                 pathogen peptide bound                                            lymph node
                                     to MHC protein

      PATHOGENS ENTER THROUGH                                                 ACTIVATED DENDRITIC CELL ACTIVATES                                      ACTIVATED DENDRITIC CELL      BREAK IN SKIN AND ARE                                                                 SPECIFIC T CELLS TO RESPOND TO PATHOGEN                                        CARRIES PATHOGEN PEPTIDES     PHAGOCYTOSED BY                                                               PEPTIDES BOUND TO MHC PROTEINS ON                                 TO LOCAL LYMPH NODE      DENDRITIC CELL                                                               DENDRITIC CELL SURFACE

                       INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE                                    ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

Figure 24–11 Dendritic cells as functional links between the innate and adaptive immune systems. Dendritic cells
pick up invading pathogens or their products at the site of an infection. The pathogen PAMPs activate the dendritic cells to
express co-stimulatory proteins and increased amounts of MHC proteins on their surface and to migrate via lymphatic vessels
to a nearby lymph node. In the lymph node, the activated dendritic cells activate T cells that express appropriate receptors
for the co-stimulatory proteins and the pathogen peptides bound to MHC proteins on the dendritic-cell surface. The activated
T cells proliferate, and some of their progeny migrate via lymphatic and blood vessels to the original site of infection, where
they help eliminate the pathogen, either by activating local macrophages to engulf and kill the pathogen or by directly killing
infected host cells (not shown). In addition, some of the activated T cells help stimulate specific B cells in the lymph node to
secrete antibodies against the pathogen (not shown).
  A crucial feature of dendritic-cell activation is that the pathogen provides an individual dendritic cell with both the peptides
for presentation to T cells and the PAMP signals that activate the dendritic cell to express co-stimulatory proteins. In this
way, the individual dendritic cell has all it needs to activate specific T cells that recognize the peptide–MHC complexes on its
surface (Movie 24.3).


these innate immune responses can also recruit more powerful adaptive immune
responses, which are pathogen-specific and help fight the infection. Innate immune
responses rely on the ability of host cells to recognize characteristic features of
microbial molecules called pathogen-associated molecular patterns, or PAMPs,
which can be associated with a pathogen’s proteins, lipids, sugars, or nucleic acids.
PAMPs are mainly recognized by a variety of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs),
including the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) found on or in both plant and animal
cells. In vertebrates, some PRRs are secreted and can activate complement when
they bind to PAMPs on the pathogen surface. The complement system, which can
also be activated by antimicrobial antibodies bound to pathogens, consists of a
group of blood proteins that are activated in sequence to help fight infections by
disrupting the pathogen’s membrane, stimulating an inflammatory response, or,
most important, by targeting the microbe for phagocytosis—mainly by macro-
phages and neutrophils. The phagocytes use a combination of hydrolytic enzymes,
antimicrobial peptides, and oxygen-derived toxic molecules to  kill invading
pathogens; in addition, they secrete various signal molecules that help trigger an
inflammatory response.
    Cells infected by a virus produce and secrete type I interferons (IFNa and IFNb),
which induce a complex set of host-cell responses that inhibit viral replication. The
interferons also enhance the killing activity of natural killer (NK) cells. An NK cell
kills infected host cells because they express large amounts of surface proteins that
activate the NK cell; the killing is especially efficient when infected cells express
reduced amounts of class I MHC proteins, which, when present in normal amounts
on the surface of a healthy host cell, inhibit the killing activity of NK cells.

=== Original PDF page 1403 ===
1364   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


   Dendritic cells of the innate immune system functionally link innate immune
responses to adaptive immune responses. They become activated when their
PRRs recognize pathogens and the products of pathogens at sites of infection and
phagocytose them. The activated dendritic cells cleave the pathogen proteins into
peptide fragments, which bind to newly made MHC proteins, which transport the
fragments to the dendritic-cell surface. The activated cells then carry the peptide–
MHC complexes to a lymph organ, where they activate appropriate T cells to make
pathogen-specific adaptive immune responses against the invading microbes.

OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
A dramatic “big bang” in the evolution of animal immune defense mechanisms
occurred when jawed vertebrates acquired an adaptive immune system. This
sophisticated defense system depends on B and T lymphocytes (B and T cells),
which, during their development, rearrange specific DNA sequences in various
combinations so that, together, the cells can produce an almost limitless variety of
B and T cell receptors and secreted antibodies. Collectively, these cell-surface and
secreted proteins can bind to essentially any molecule—operationally referred to
as an antigen—including small chemicals, carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
Individually, the receptors and antibodies can distinguish between antigens that
are very similar—such as between two proteins or peptides that differ in only a
single amino acid or between two optical isomers of the same small molecule.
By this strategy, the adaptive immune system can recognize and respond specifi-
cally to any pathogen, including new mutant forms. However, because the genetic
rearrangement processes involved produce receptors that can bind to self mole-
cules as well as receptors that can bind to foreign molecules, vertebrates have had
to evolve special mechanisms to ensure that B and T cells do not react against the
host’s own molecules and cells—a process called immunological self-tolerance.
   Moreover, many harmless foreign substances enter the body, for example, as
food or inhaled material, and it would be pointless and potentially dangerous to
mount adaptive immune responses against them. Such inappropriate responses
are normally avoided because innate immune responses are required to call
adaptive immune responses into play and do so only when the innate cells’ PRRs
recognize microbial PAMPs, as we discussed earlier. One can trick the adaptive
immune system into responding to a harmless foreign molecule, such as a foreign
protein, by co-injecting a molecule (often of microbial origin) called an adjuvant,
which activates PRRs. This trick is called immunization, and it can be exploited in
vaccination (discussed later).
   There are two broad classes of adaptive immune responses—antibody
responses and T cell–mediated immune responses—and most pathogens induce
both classes of responses. In antibody responses, B cells are activated to secrete
antibodies, which are proteins that circulate in the bloodstream and permeate
other body fluids, where they can bind specifically to the foreign antigen that stim-
ulated their production. Binding of antibody can neutralize extracellular viruses
(see Figure 24–2) and microbial toxins (such as tetanus toxin or cholera toxin) by
blocking their ability to bind to receptors on host cells. Antibody binding can also
mark invading pathogens for destruction, both by making it easier for phagocytes
of the innate immune system to ingest and destroy them and by activating the
complement system by the classical pathway (see Figure 24–7).
   In T cell–mediated immune responses, T cells recognize foreign antigens that
are bound to MHC proteins on the surface of host cells such as dendritic cells, which
are specialized for presenting antigen to T cells and are therefore often referred
to as “professional” antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Because MHC proteins carry
fragments of pathogen proteins from inside a host cell to the cell surface, T cells
can detect pathogens hiding inside a host cell and either kill the infected cell (see
Figure 24–2) or stimulate phagocytes or B cells to help eliminate the pathogens.
   In this section, we discuss the origins and general properties of B and
T cells. In later sections, we consider the specific properties and functions of
these cells.

=== Original PDF page 1404 ===
OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                 1365


                                                                                             Figure 24–12 Human lymphoid organs.
                                                                                      Lymphocytes develop from lymphoid
                                                                                                       progenitor cells in the thymus and bone
                       adenoid                                                        marrow (yellow), which are therefore called
                                                                       tonsil                                       central (or primary) lymphoid organs. Newly
                                                                                        formed lymphocytes migrate from these
                                                                                                  primary organs to peripheral (or secondary)
                                                                                            lymphoid organs (blue), where B and
                                                                   lymphatic vessels               T cells respond to foreign antigen. Only                    thymus
                                                                           some of the peripheral lymphoid organs
                                                                                   and lymphatic vessels (green) are shown;                                                               lymph nodes
                                                                             many lymphocytes, for example, are
                                                                                           found in the skin and respiratory tract. As
                                                                       we discuss later, the lymphatic vessels                Peyer's patches in                                          spleen
               small intestine                                                                                  ultimately empty into the bloodstream
                                                                                                               (not shown).

             appendix

           bone marrow





B Cells Develop in the Bone Marrow, T Cells in the Thymus
There are about 2 × 1012 lymphocytes in the human body, making the immune
system comparable in cell mass to the liver or the brain. They occur in large num-
bers in the blood and lymph (the colorless fluid in the lymphatic vessels, which
connect the lymph nodes in the body to each other and to the bloodstream). They
are also concentrated in lymphoid organs, such as the thymus, lymph nodes, and
spleen (Figure 24–12), and many are also found in other organs, including skin,
lung, and gut.
  T cells and B cells derive their names from the organs in which they develop:
T cells develop in the thymus, and B cells, in adult mammals, develop in the bone
marrow. Both types of cells develop from lymphoid progenitor cells that are pro-
duced from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells, which, in adults, are found
mainly in the bone marrow (Figure 24–13). The hematopoietic stem cells give rise



                bone                   thymus               peripheral
              marrow                                      lymphoid organs



 lymphoid
 progenitor                                                                                   Figure 24–13 The development of B
  cell                                                             T cell                                                                                T CELL–     and T cells in adult humans. The central
                                                                        MEDIATED   lymphoid organs, where lymphocytes                                                  thymocyte
                                                                IMMUNE     develop from lymphoid progenitor cells,
                                                                           RESPONSE    are labeled in yellow boxes. The lymphoidhematopoietic                                                       antigen
stem cells                                                                                              progenitor cells develop from multipotent
                                                                       ANTIBODY   hematopoietic stem cells in the bone
                                                                           RESPONSE    marrow. Some lymphoid progenitor cells
                                                            B cell                      develop locally in the bone marrow into
 lymphoid                                                                                 immature B cells, while others migrate
 progenitor                                                                                                                    via the bloodstream to the thymus where  cell
                                                                                                   they develop into thymocytes (developing
                                                                                 T cells). Foreign antigens activate B cells immature
 B cell                                                                              and T cells mainly in peripheral lymphoid
                                                                                                 organs, such as lymph nodes and the
                                                                                                      spleen.

=== Original PDF page 1405 ===
1366   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                                                                                             Figure 24–14 Electron micrographs
                                                                                                   of resting and effector B and T cells.
                                                                                                                         (A) This resting lymphocyte could be
                                                                                                                  either a B cell or a T cell, as these cells
                                                                                                     are difficult to distinguish morphologically
                                                                                                                                 until antigen activates them to become
                                                                                                                effector cells. (B) An effector B cell (a
                                                                                       plasma cell). It is filled with an extensive
                                                                                           rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which
                                                                                                                                       is distended with antibody molecules
                                                                                                             that are secreted in large amounts. (C) An
                                                                                                                effector T cell, which has relatively little
                      1 µm                                                                 rough ER but is filled with free ribosomes;
                                                                                 1 µm              it secretes cytokines, but in relatively
                                                                                                      small amounts. The three cells are shown
                                                     1 µm                                         at the same magnification. (A and B,
                                                                                             from D. Zucker-Franklin et al., Atlas of
    (A) resting B or T cell           (B) effector B cell (plasma cell)           (C) effector T cell                                                                                         Blood Cells: Function and Pathology,
                                                                                 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1988.
                                                                                                 Reprinted with permission of Wolters
                                                                                                  Kluwer; C, David M. Phillips/Science
to more than just lymphocytes: as discussed in Chapter 22, they produce all of the     Source.)
cells of the hematopoietic system, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and plate-
lets (see Figure 22–12).
   Because they are sites where B and T lymphocytes (as well as innate
lymphoid cells, such as NK cells) develop from lymphoid progenitor cells, the thy-
mus and bone marrow are referred to as central, or primary, lymphoid organs
(see Figure 24–12). Here, lymphocytes differentiate and then migrate via the blood
to the peripheral, or secondary, lymphoid organs—mainly the lymph nodes,
spleen, and epithelium-associated lymphoid tissues in the gastrointestinal tract,
respiratory tract, and skin. It is in these peripheral lymphoid organs that foreign
antigens activate B and T cells (see Figure 24–13).
  B and T cells become morphologically distinguishable from each other only
after antigen has activated them: resting B and T cells look very similar, even in an
electron microscope (Figure 24–14A). After activation by an antigen, both B and
T cells proliferate and mature into effector cells. Effector B cells secrete antibodies;
in their most mature form, called plasma cells, they are filled with an extensive
rough endoplasmic reticulum that is busily making antibodies (Figure 24–14B). In
contrast, effector T cells (Figure 24–14C) contain very little endoplasmic reticulum
and secrete a variety of cytokines rather than antibodies. Whereas B cell–derived
antibodies are widely distributed by the bloodstream, T cell–derived cytokines
mainly act locally, on cells the T cell contacts or on noncontacted neighboring
cells, although some are carried via the blood and act on distant host cells.

Immunological Memory Depends on Both Clonal Expansion
and Lymphocyte Differentiation

The most remarkable feature of the adaptive immune system is that it can respond
to millions of different foreign antigens in a highly specific way. Human B cells, for
example, collectively can make more than 1012 different antibody molecules that
react specifically with the antigen that induced their production. How can B cells
and T cells respond specifically to such an enormous diversity of foreign antigens?
The answer for both B and T cells is the same. As each lymphocyte develops in a
central lymphoid organ, it becomes committed to react with a particular antigen
before ever being exposed to it. The cell expresses this commitment in the form
of cell-surface receptors that specifically bind the antigen. When a lymphocyte
encounters its antigen in a peripheral lymphoid organ, the binding of the antigen
to the receptors, with help from co-stimulatory signals (see Figure 24–11, and dis-
cussed later), activates the lymphocyte; this causes the lymphocyte to proliferate,
thereby producing many more cells with the same antigen-specific receptors—a
process called clonal expansion. The encounter with antigen also causes some of
the cells to differentiate into effector cells. An antigen therefore selectively stim-
ulates those cells that express complementary antigen-specific receptors and are

=== Original PDF page 1406 ===
OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                 1367


                                  lymphoid                                                    Figure 24–15 Clonal selection. An antigen
                                  progenitor cell                                                         activates only those B and T cells that are
                                                                                                      already committed to respond to it. The
                                                       BONE                     committed cell expresses cell-surface
                                              MARROW                      receptors that specifically recognize the
                                                                                                         antigen. The human adaptive immune
                                                          PROLIFERATION AND               system consists of many millions of
                                                              DIVERSIFICATION OF                    different B and T cell clones, with cells
                    different                               NEWLY FORMED
                immature    Bα     Bβ     Bγ            IMMATURE B CELLS                   within a clone expressing the same unique
               B cells                                                                            antigen receptor. Before its first encounter
                                                                                                      with antigen, a clone would usually
                                                                                                    contain only one or a small number of
                                                     BLOOD
                                                                                                                             cells. A particular antigen may activate
                            BLOOD                   MIGRATION OF                 hundreds of different clones, each
                                                   IMMATURE B CELLS                 expressing a different antigen receptor that
                                                   TO PERIPHERAL                  binds either a different part of the antigen
                                                    LYMPHOID ORGANS                  or the same part with a different binding
                                                                                                                                             affinity. Although only B cells are shown                     mature
                        naïve    Bα   Bβ   Bγ                                                       here, T cells are selected in a similar way.
                    B cells                                                              Note that the antigen receptors on the
                                                                    B cells labeled Bβ in this diagram have the
                                                              PERIPHERAL                same antigen-binding site as the antibodies
                    antigen                               LYMPHOID ORGAN                 secreted by the effector Bβ cells. As we
                                                                                                 discuss later, B cells require co-stimulatory
                                  Bβ                       PROLIFERATION                     signals from T cells to become activated by
                                                       (CLONAL EXPANSION)                antigen to proliferate and differentiate into
                                             AND DIFFERENTIATION
                                                                                                      antibody-secreting cells (not shown).                                                     OF Bβ CELLS INTO
                                                        ANTIBODY-SECRETING
          antibody-                                          EFFECTOR CELLS
          secreting     Bβ       Bβ       Bβ      Bβ
           effector
        Bβ cells

          secreted
          antibodies


thus already committed to respond to it (Figure 24–15). This arrangement, called
clonal selection, provides an explanation for immunological memory, whereby
we develop longlasting immunity to many common infectious diseases after our
initial exposure to the pathogen—either through natural infection or vaccination.
     It  is easy to demonstrate such immunological memory in experimental
animals. If an animal is immunized once with antigen A, an adaptive immune
response (antibody, T cell–mediated, or both) can be detected after several days;
the response rises rapidly and exponentially, and then, more gradually, declines.
This is the characteristic course of a primary immune response, occurring on an
animal’s first exposure to an antigen. If, after some weeks, months, or even years
have elapsed, the animal is immunized again with antigen A, it will usually pro-
duce a secondary immune response that differs from the primary response: the
lag period is shorter, because there are now many more preexisting B or T cells (or
both) with specificity for antigen A, and the response is greater and more efficient.
These differences indicate that the animal has “remembered” its first exposure
to antigen A. If the animal is given a different antigen (for example, antigen B)
instead of a second immunization with antigen A, the response is typical of a pri-
mary, and not a secondary, immune response. The secondary response therefore
reflects antigen-specific immunological memory for antigen A (Figure 24–16).
   Immunological memory depends on both lymphocyte proliferation and dif-
ferentiation. In an adult animal, the peripheral lymphoid organs contain a mixture
of B and T cells in at least three stages of maturation: naïve cells, effector cells, and
memory cells. When naïve cells encounter their specific foreign antigen for the
first time, the antigen stimulates some of them to proliferate and differentiate into
effector cells, which then carry out an immune response: effector B cells secrete
antibody, whereas effector T cells either kill infected cells (see Figure 24–2) or
influence the response of other immune cells—by secreting cytokines, for exam-
ple. Whereas most of the effector cells die after the pathogen has been eliminated,

=== Original PDF page 1407 ===
1368   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                100                                                                          Figure 24–16 Immunological memory:
                                                                                          primary and secondary antibody
                                                                                         responses. The secondary response
                                                                                           induced by a second exposure to antigen                                         scale)
                                                                       A is faster and greater than the primary                             bloodIog 10                           secondary                                        response and is specific for A, indicating            in                               response to
                                         units,      primary response        antigen A        primaryto antigenresponseB                        thatspecificallythe adaptiverememberedimmuneitssystemprevioushas                           to antigen A
                                                                                             encounter with antigen A. The same type
                  1                                                                                        of immunological memory is observed in                                                           antibodies                                                                     (arbitrary                                                                  T cell–mediated responses (not shown). As
                                                                       we discuss later, the types of antibodies
                                                                                       produced in the secondary response
                                                                                                     are different from those produced in the
                    0      10      20      30      40      50      60
                                                                   time (days)                     primary response, and these antibodies
                                                                                                bind the antigen more tightly.
                     ﬁrst immunization         second immunization with antigen A
                  with antigen A              ﬁrst immunization with antigen B

a long-lived population of memory cells usually persists, which can more easily
and more quickly be induced to become effector cells by a later encounter with
the same antigen: like naïve cells, when memory cells encounter their antigen,                       naïve cell
they give rise to effector cells and more memory cells (Figure 24–17).
   Thus, during the primary response, clonal expansion and differentiation                 ﬁrst exposure to antigen
creates many antigen-specific memory cells, some of which can persist as a pop-
ulation for the lifetime of the animal, even in the absence of their specific antigen,
thereby providing lifelong protection against the pathogen. Whereas many newly
formed memory T and B cells join the pool of T and B cells that continually recir-
culate through peripheral lymphoid organs (discussed shortly), some memory
T cells remain permanently at the site of pathogen entry as tissue-resident memory
T cells, which provide long-term local protection against reinfection. In addition,
a small proportion of the plasma cells produced in a primary B cell response in a        memory cells          effector cells
peripheral lymphoid organ migrate to the bone marrow, where they can survive                                                                                                   second exposure
for years and continue to secrete their specific antibodies into the bloodstream,            to antigen
contributing to long-term immunological memory.

Most B and T Cells Continually Recirculate Through Peripheral
Lymphoid Organs

Pathogens generally enter the body through an epithelial surface, usually through
the skin, gut, or respiratory tract. To induce an adaptive immune response, patho-        memory cells
genic microbes or their products must travel from these entry points to a peripheral
lymphoid organ such as a lymph node, where B and T cells become activated (see
Figure 24–11). The route and destination depend on the site of entry. Lymphatic
vessels carry antigens that enter through the skin or respiratory tract to local lymph
nodes; antigens that enter through the gut end up in gut-associated peripheral
lymphoid organs such as Peyer’s patches; and the spleen filters out antigens that
enter the blood (see Figure 24–12). As discussed earlier (see Figure 24–11), in many                                   effector cells
cases, activated dendritic cells will carry the antigen from the site of infection to
                                                                                             Figure 24–17 Clonal expansion andthe peripheral lymphoid organ, where they play a crucial part in activating T cells,                                                                                          production of memory cells as the
as we discuss later.                                                                                     cellular basis of immunological memory.
   But only a tiny fraction of naïve B and T cells can recognize a particular micro-    When stimulated by their specific antigen
bial antigen in a peripheral lymphoid organ, a reasonable estimate being between    and co-stimulatory signals, both naïve B
1/10,000 and 1/1,000,000 of each class of lymphocyte, depending on the antigen.    and T cells proliferate and differentiate,
                                                                                             producing both effector cells and memory
How do these rare cells find an antigen-presenting cell displaying their specific                                                                                                                             cells. In principle, memory cells could form
antigen? The answer is that the lymphocytes continually recirculate between one      either directly from naïve cells, as shown
peripheral lymphoid organ and another via the lymph and blood. In a lymph     here, or from “retired” effector cells (not
node, for example, lymphocytes continually leave the bloodstream by squeezing     shown); for some types of T cells, at least,
out between specialized endothelial cells lining small veins called postcapillary      effector cells can become memory cells.
                                                                        When exposed to the same antigen in the
venules. After percolating through the node, they accumulate in small lymphatic                                                                                           presence of co-stimulatory signals, memory
vessels that leave the node and connect with other lymphatic vessels that pass      cells respond more readily, rapidly, and
through other lymph nodes downstream (see Figure 24–12). Passing into larger      efficiently than do naïve cells.

=== Original PDF page 1408 ===
OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                 1369


and larger vessels, the lymphocytes eventually enter the main lymphatic vessel
(the thoracic duct), which carries them back into the blood (Figure 24–18).                              infected tissue
   The continual recirculation of a lymphocyte between the blood and lymph
ends only if its specific antigen activates it in a peripheral lymphoid organ. In that               afferentlymphatic
case, the lymphocyte remains in the peripheral lymphoid organ, where it prolifer-                vessel
ates and differentiates to produce effector and memory T and B cells. Many of the
effector T cells leave the lymphoid organ via the lymph and migrate through the                   lymph node     efferentlymphatic
blood to the site of infection (see Figure 24–11), whereas others stay in the lym-                                           vessel
phoid organ and help activate B cells to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells      postcapillary
and undergo further maturation (discussed later). Some effector B cells (includ-     venule
ing some of the most mature, plasma cells) remain in the peripheral lymphoid                                  thoracic
organ and secrete antibodies into the blood and undergo further maturation                               duct
(discussed later). Many of the memory B and T cells produced in a peripheral
lymphoid organ join the recirculating pool of naïve and memory lymphocytes.                                                artery
   Lymphocyte recirculation depends on specific interactions between the                vein
lymphocyte cell surface and the surface of the endothelial cells lining the blood                              heart
vessels in the peripheral lymphoid organs. Lymphocytes that enter a lymph node
via the blood, for example, adhere weakly to specialized endothelial cells lining
the postcapillary venules via homing receptors that belong to the selectin family     Figure 24–18 The path followed by
of cell-surface lectins that bind to specific sugar groups on the endothelial cell    lymphocytes that continually recirculate
surface (see Figure 19–28). The lymphocytes roll slowly along the surface of the    between the lymph and blood. The
endothelial cells until another, much stronger adhesion system, dependent on      circulation through a lymph node (yellow) is
                                                                               shown here. Microbial antigens are usually
an integrin protein, is called into play by chemokines secreted by the endothelial     carried into the lymph node by activated
cells. Now, the lymphocytes stop rolling, and they crawl out of the blood ves-     dendritic cells (not shown), which enter the
sel into the lymph node by using yet another cell adhesion protein called CD31    node via afferent lymphatic vessels draining
(Figure 24–19). Although B and T cells initially enter the same region of a lymph    an infected tissue (green). B and T cells,
                                                                                       by contrast, enter via the blood, migratingnode, different chemokines guide them to separate regions of the node—B cells                                                                                                 out of the bloodstream into the lymph node
to lymphoid follicles and T cells to the paracortex (Figure 24–20).                       through postcapillary venules. Unless they
   Unless they encounter their antigen, both B and T cells soon leave the lymph     encounter their antigen, the B and T cells
node via efferent lymphatic vessels. If they encounter their antigen, however, they     leave the lymph node via efferent lymphatic
are stimulated to display adhesion receptors that trap the cells in the node; the     vessels, which eventually join the thoracic
                                                                                                      duct. The thoracic duct empties into a large
cells accumulate at the junction between the B cell and T cell areas, where the                                                                                                          vein carrying blood to the heart, completing
                                                                                                    the recirculation cycle for T and B cells.
               basal                                                          A typical recirculation cycle for these
              lamina                                                                         lymphocytes takes about 12–24 hours.




                                       STRONG ADHESION                   WEAK ADHESION                                                   (integrin-dependent)                     AND ROLLING                                    AND EMIGRATION                            (selectin-dependent)                                    postcapillary                                                (CD31-dependent)                                                                            venule
                lymphocyte                                  chemokine


        specialized
        endothelial cell
       of postcapillary
       venule


                                           chemokine

Figure 24–19 Migration of a lymphocyte out of the bloodstream into a lymph node. A
recirculating lymphocyte adheres weakly to the surface of the specialized endothelial cells lining
a postcapillary venule in a lymph node (see Figure 24–18). This initial adhesion is mediated by
L-selectin (discussed in Chapter 19) on the lymphocyte surface. The adhesion is sufficiently
weak to enable the lymphocyte, pushed by the flow of blood, to roll along the surface of the
endothelial cells. Stimulated by chemokines secreted by specialized endothelial cells in the node
(curved red arrow), the lymphocyte rapidly activates a stronger adhesion system, mediated by an
integrin protein. This strong adhesion enables the cell to stop rolling. The lymphocyte then uses
an immunoglobulin-like cell adhesion protein (CD31) to bind to the junctions between adjacent
endothelial cells and migrate out of the venule. The subsequent migration of the lymphocyte in the
lymph node is directed by chemokines produced within the node (straight red arrow). The migration
of other types of leukocytes out of the bloodstream into sites of infection occurs in a similar way
(see Figure 19–28 and Movie 19.2).

=== Original PDF page 1409 ===
1370   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                                           afferent lymphatic vessels                                  Figure 24–20 A simplified drawing of a
                                                                       human lymph node. B cells are mainly
                                                                                           found in lymphoid follicles, whereas
        lymphoid follicles                                                             T cells are found mainly in the paracortex.
         (mainly B cells)                                                       Some of the lymphoid follicles contain
         paracortex                                                                                germinal centers, where B cells, activated
         (mainly T cells)                                                                   by their specific antigen (with the help of
                                                                                   postcapillary                                                                                                        activated T cells), proliferate rapidly and                                                                        venule
                                                                                                                      differentiate into memory and effector cells
         medullary cord                                                                                    (as discussed later). Chemokines attract
                                                                        marginal sinus               resting B and T cells into the lymph node
                                                                                             from the blood via postcapillary venules
                                                                                                      (see Figure 24–19), after which the two         germinal centers                                               medullary sinus
          in lymphoid follicles                                                                                             cell types migrate to their respective
         (mainly B cells)                                                                                areas, attracted by different chemokines.
                                                           efferent                                                                       If they do not encounter their specific
                                                        lymphatic vessel                                antigen, both B and T cells then migrate
                                              artery                                                        to the medullary sinus and leave the node
                                                                                                                    via the efferent lymphatic vessel, which
                                        vein                                                                carries the lymph away from the node to a
                                                             3 mm
                                                                                    downstream lymph node (not shown).
                                                                                                               After traveling from node to node, the
                                                                                       lymph enters a large lymphatic vessel,
rare antigen-specific B and T cells can interact, leading to their proliferation and     the thoracic duct, that empties into the
differentiation into either effector cells or memory cells. Many of the effector cells     bloodstream to begin another cycle of
leave the node, expressing different chemokine receptors that help guide them to   B and T cell circulation through peripheral
                                                                                            lymphoid organs (see Figure 24–18).their new destinations—effector plasma cells to the bone marrow, for example,
and effector T cells to sites of infection.

Immunological Self-tolerance Ensures That B and T Cells Do Not
Attack Normal Host Cells and Molecules

As discussed earlier, cells of the innate immune system use PRRs to distinguish
microbial molecules from self molecules made by the host. The adaptive immune
system has the far more difficult recognition task of responding specifically to
an almost unlimited number of foreign molecules while not responding to the
large number of self molecules. How does it accomplish this feat? It helps that self
molecules normally do not induce the innate immune reactions required to
activate adaptive immune responses. But even when an infection or tissue injury
triggers innate reactions, the vast majority of self molecules normally still fail to
induce an adaptive immune response. Why?
  One important reason is that the adaptive immune system “learns” not
to respond to self molecules. Normal mice, for example, cannot mount an
immune response against one of their own protein components of the com-
plement system called C5 (see Figure 24–7). However, mutant mice that lack
the gene encoding C5 but are otherwise genetically identical to normal mice
of the same strain can make a strong immune response to this blood protein
when immunized with  it. The immunological self-tolerance exhibited by
normal mice persists only for as long as the self molecule remains in the body: if
a self molecule such as C5 is experimentally removed from an adult mouse, the
animal gains the ability to respond to it after a few weeks or months, as new B
and T cells develop in the absence of C5. Thus, the adaptive immune system is
genetically capable of responding to self molecules but deploys multiple strat-
egies to avoid doing so.
   Self-tolerance depends on a number of distinct mechanisms, including the
following (Figure 24–21):
    1. In receptor editing, developing B cells that recognize self molecules change
       their antigen receptors so that the cells no longer do so.

    2. In clonal deletion, large numbers of developing, potentially self-reactive
     B and T cells die by apoptosis when they encounter their particular self
      molecule.

    3. In clonal inactivation (also called clonal anergy), self-reactive B and T cells
     become functionally inactivated when they encounter their self molecule.

=== Original PDF page 1410 ===
OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM                                                 1371


    4. In  clonal  suppression,  self-reactive  regulatory T  cells  (discussed
       later) suppress the activity of other types of potentially self-reactive
      lymphocytes.
As we discuss later, some of these mechanisms—especially the first two, recep-
tor editing in B cells and clonal deletion of B and T cells—operate in central
lymphoid organs when self-reactive developing B and T cells first encounter
their self molecules, and they are largely responsible for the process called
central tolerance. Clonal inactivation and clonal suppression, by contrast, operate
mainly when mature B and T cells encounter their self molecules in peripheral
lymphoid organs, and they are largely responsible for the process called periph-
eral tolerance. Clonal deletion, however, can also operate peripherally, and clonal
inactivation can also operate centrally.
  Why does the binding of a self molecule lead to tolerance rather than activa-
tion? The answer is still not completely known. As we discuss later, the activation
of a B or T cell by its antigen in a peripheral lymphoid organ requires more than
just antigen binding: it requires co-stimulatory signals, which are provided by a
helper T cell in the case of a B cell and by an activated dendritic cell in the case of
a naïve T cell. The production of such signals is usually triggered by exposure to
a pathogen, but a self-reactive lymphocyte normally encounters its self antigen
in the absence of such signals. Under these conditions, the lymphocyte will not
only fail to be activated, it will often be rendered tolerant—being killed (deleted),
or inactivated, or suppressed by a regulatory T cell (see Figure 24–21). In periph-
eral lymphoid organs, both T cell tolerance and activation usually occur through
interactions with a dendritic cell, although the type or state of the dendritic cell is
different in the two cases.





                             B cell with                                                                            1′
                                  altered speciﬁcity                                                                           effector or memory
                                                                                                                 lymphocytes
                   1                        1′                                         1′                                    1′
                        RECEPTOR                                               foreign
                           EDITING                                             antigen
                            self antigens                  mature
                                                        naïve                    co-stimulatory                                                                                        signal                                                   lymphocytes
                   2                                                                             3
                       CLONAL                                                foreign                              effector or memory immature
                         DELETION   dead                                    antigen                          lymphocyteslymphocytes                                    lymphocyte
                   3                                                 3                           3
                                                                      CLONAL
                                                                            DELETION                 dead
                   4                                                 4                                      lymphocyte
                                                                     CLONAL                                                                                                                              inactivated
                                                                                                 self      INACTIVATION     4         lymphocyte                                                                          antigen
                                                                     CLONAL                                                                                                                    suppressed
                                                                             SUPPRESSION
                                                                                                4         lymphocyte                CENTRAL LYMPHOID ORGAN

                                                                                                                         regulatory
                                                                                                          T cell

                                                                     PERIPHERAL LYMPHOID ORGAN

Figure 24–21 Mechanisms of immunological self-tolerance. When a potentially self-reactive immature B cell recognizes
a specific self antigen in the central lymphoid organ (the bone marrow) where the cell is produced, it may alter its antigen
receptor so that it no longer recognizes the self antigen (cell 1); this process is called receptor editing. Alternatively, when
either a potentially self-reactive developing B or T cell recognizes a specific self antigen in a central lymphoid organ, it may
die by apoptosis, a process called clonal deletion (cell 2). Because these two forms of tolerance (shown on the left) occur in
central lymphoid organs, they are called central tolerance.
  When a potentially self-reactive developing B or T cell escapes tolerance in the central lymphoid organ and binds its
specific self antigen in a peripheral lymphoid organ (cell 4) or in a nonlymphoid peripheral tissue (not shown), it will generally
not be activated, because the binding usually occurs in the absence of sufficient co-stimulatory signals; instead, the cell may
die by apoptosis (often after a period of proliferation), be inactivated, or be suppressed by a regulatory T cell. These forms of
tolerance (shown on the right) are called peripheral tolerance. As discussed later, the cells providing the co-stimulatory signals
are T lymphocytes for B cells and usually dendritic cells for T cells (not shown).

=== Original PDF page 1411 ===
1372   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


   For reasons that are usually unknown, self-tolerance mechanisms sometimes
fail, causing T or B cells (or both) to react against the animal’s own molecules.
Myasthenia gravis is an example of such an autoimmune disease. Most of the
affected individuals make antibodies against the acetylcholine receptors on
their own skeletal muscle cells; these receptors are required for the muscle to
contract normally in response to nerve stimulation, which releases acetylcholine
(see Figure 11–39). The antibodies interfere with the normal functioning of the
receptors so that the individuals become weak and may die because they can-
not breathe. Similarly, in juvenile (type 1) diabetes, adaptive immune reactions
against insulin-secreting β cells in the pancreas kill these cells, leading to severe
insulin deficiency.

Summary

The human adaptive immune system is composed of many millions of B and T cell
clones, with the cells in each clone sharing a unique cell-surface receptor that
enables them to bind a particular pathogen antigen. The binding of antigen to these
receptors, with the help of membrane-bound co-stimulatory signals, activates the
lymphocyte to proliferate and differentiate into an effector cell that helps eliminate
the pathogen. Effector B cells secrete antibodies, which can act over long distances
to help eliminate extracellular pathogens and to neutralize their toxins. Effector
T cells, by contrast, produce cell-surface co-stimulatory molecules and secreted
cytokines, which act locally to help other immune cells eliminate the pathogen; in
addition, some T cells induce infected host cells to kill themselves.
   During a primary adaptive immune response to an antigen, B and T cells that
recognize the antigen proliferate, so there are more of them to respond the next
time, during a secondary response to the same antigen. Moreover, although most
effector cells produced during a primary response die after the pathogen is elim-
inated, some of the lymphocytes activated during the primary response become
long-lived memory cells, which can respond faster and more efficiently the next
time the same pathogen invades. These two mechanisms—clonal expansion and
differentiation into memory cells—are largely responsible for immunological
memory. Both B and T cells circulate continually between one peripheral lymphoid
organ and another via the blood and lymph; only if they encounter their specific
foreign antigen in a peripheral lymphoid organ do they stop migrating, prolifer-
ate, and differentiate into effector cells and memory cells. B and T cells that would
react against self molecules either alter their receptors (in the case of B cells) or are
eliminated, inactivated, or suppressed by regulatory T cells. These mechanisms
collectively are responsible for immunological self-tolerance, which helps ensure
that the adaptive immune system normally avoids attacking the molecules and
cells of the host.

B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS
We would die of infection if we were unable to make antibodies. Antibodies
are secreted proteins that defend us against extracellular pathogens in sev-
eral ways. They bind to viruses and microbial toxins, thereby preventing them
from binding to host cells (see Figure 24–2). When bound to an extracellular
pathogen or its products, antibodies also recruit some of the components of
the innate immune system, including various types of leukocytes and compo-
nents of the complement system, which work together to inactivate or eliminate
the invaders.
   Antibodies are synthesized exclusively by B cells. They are produced in
billions of different varieties, each with a unique antigen-binding site formed by
one or more unique amino acid sequences. They belong to the class of proteins
called immunoglobulins (abbreviated as Igs) and are among the most abundant
protein components in the blood. In this section, we discuss the structure and
function of immunoglobulins and how each of us can make them with so many
different antigen-binding sites.

=== Original PDF page 1412 ===
B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                                                           1373

B Cells Make Immunoglobulins (Igs) as both Cell-Surface Antigen                    antigen     antigenic
Receptors and Secreted Antibodies                                                     antigenB cell              determinant
                                                                                                             receptor     B        restingThe first Igs made by a developing B cell are not secreted but are instead inserted           (BCR)               naïve or
into the plasma membrane, where they serve as receptors for antigen. They are                        memory                                                                                                          B cell
called B cell receptors (BCRs), and each B cell has approximately 105 of them on
its surface. Each BCR is stably associated with invariant transmembrane proteins              PROLIFERATION
that activate intracellular signaling pathways when antigen binds to the BCR; we               AND
                                                                                                       DIFFERENTIATION
discuss these invariant proteins later, when we consider how B cells are activated
with the assistance of helper T cells.
   Each B cell clone produces a single species of BCR, with a unique antigen-bind-
ing site. When an antigen and a helper T cell activate a naïve or a memory B cell,                   effector B cells
the B cell proliferates and differentiates into an effector cell, which then produces       B       B       B       B
and secretes large amounts of soluble (rather than membrane-bound) Ig. The
secreted Ig is now called an antibody, and it has the same unique antigen-binding                                          secretedantibodies
site as the BCR (Figure 24–22; and see Figure 24–15).
  A typical Ig molecule is bivalent, with two identical antigen-binding sites. It con-
sists of four polypeptide chains—two identical light chains and two identical heavy
chains. The N-terminal parts of both light and heavy chains usually cooperate to form     Figure 24–22 Activation of a B cell by
the antigen-binding surface, while the more C-terminal parts of the heavy chains     antigen. The binding of an antigen to the
form the tail of the Y-shaped protein (Figure 24–23). The tail mediates many of the   B cell receptors (BCRs) on either a
activities of antibodies, and antibodies with the same antigen-binding sites can have     naïve or a memory B cell (together with
                                                                                                       co-stimulatory signals provided by helper
any one of a number of different tail regions, each of which gives the antibody dif-                                                                                 T cells—not shown) activates the cell to
ferent functional properties, such as the ability to activate complement or to bind to      proliferate and differentiate into antibody-
receptor proteins on various immune cells that bind a specific type of antibody tail.      secreting, effector B cells. The effector
                                                                                                                       cells produce and secrete antibodies
                                                                                                      with a unique antigen-binding site, which
Mammals Make Five Classes of Igs                                                                   is the same as that of the cell-surface
                                                                                 BCRs. Because typical antibodies have
We can make five major classes of Igs, each of which mediates a characteristic                                                                                     two identical antigen-binding sites, they
biological response after antigen binding to an antibody: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and    can cross-link antigens, as shown for an
IgM, each with its own class of heavy chain (α, δ, ε, γ, and μ, respectively). IgA     antigen with multiple, identical, antigenic
molecules have α chains, IgG molecules have γ chains, and so on. Moreover, there     determinants—the parts of an antigen an
are four IgG subclasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4), with γ1, γ2, γ3, and γ4 heavy     antibody or antigen receptor binds to.
chains, respectively, and there are two IgA subclasses. In addition to the various
classes and subclasses of heavy chains, we make two types of light chains, κ and
λ, which seem to be functionally indistinguishable. Either type of light chain can
be associated with any of the heavy chains, but an individual Ig molecule always
contains identical light chains and identical heavy chains: an IgG molecule, for
instance, can have either κ or λ light chains, but not one of each. As a result, an Ig’s
antigen-binding sites are always identical (see Figures 24–22 and 24–23).


        antigen-                                                                antigen-
        binding site                                                          binding site
                 H2N                                        NH2

             H2N                                                NH2

                                           hinge
                                              regions                                                                                             Figure 24–23 A schematic drawing of a
                                                                                                   bivalent antibody molecule. The distal
                                                                                     ends of the light and heavy chains together
                S     S  S  S                S       S  S   S                                       form the two antigen-binding sites. The
                                                                                     two heavy chains each have a hinge region
                       HOOC             COOH                                          (not present in all classes of heavy chains),
                                                                                                 which, because of its flexibility, improves
                                                                                                    the efficiency with which the antibody can                                                                          light chain
                                                                                                              cross-link antigens (see Figure 24–22). The
                                          tail region
                                                          heavy chain                        two heavy chains also form the tail of the
                                                                                                        antibody, which determines the functional
                                                                                                        properties of the antibody. The heavy
                                                                                   and light chains are held together by a
                                                                                              combination of covalent S–S bonds (red)
                            HOOC    COOH                                     and noncovalent bonds (not shown).

=== Original PDF page 1413 ===
1374   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                          intracellular        µ chain                     µ chain           IgM     BCRs
                 µ chain                            surrogate                 IgM                                                                               L chain                                                         L chain
                                                                                                      IgD


                                                             BLOOD                                                           B                      B
                                                                                                    δ chain

  lymphoid             pro-B cell             pre-B cell           immature                  mature
progenitor cell                                                     naïve B cell                  naïve B cell


                                                                                      PERIPHERAL                    DEVELOPMENT IN BONE MARROW                                                                          LYMPHOID ORGANS


    All classes of human Ig can be made in a membrane-bound BCR form, as     Figure 24–24 Stages of B cell
well as in a soluble, secreted antibody form. The two forms differ only in the    development. All of the stages shown
                                                                                            occur before the B cells bind their specificC-terminus of their heavy chain. The heavy chains of membrane-bound Ig                                                                                                            foreign antigen. The first cells in the B cell
molecules (BCRs) have a transmembrane hydrophobic C-terminus, which     lineage that make Ig are called pro-B cells;
anchors them in the lipid bilayer of the B cell’s plasma membrane. The heavy     they make μ heavy chains, which remain
chains of secreted antibody molecules, by contrast, have instead a hydrophilic      in the membrane of the endoplasmic
C-terminus, which allows them to escape from the cell. The switch in the charac-     reticulum until a special type of light (L)
                                                                                                  chain is made, called a surrogate lightter of the Ig molecules made occurs because the activation of B cells by antigen                                                                                                         chain. The surrogate light chains substitute
and helper T cells induces a change in the way in which the heavy-chain RNA      for genuine light chains and assemble with
transcripts are made and processed in the nucleus (see Figure 7–62).             μ chains to form a temporary receptor
   The various Ig heavy chains give a distinctive conformation to the tail region     molecule that is delivered to the plasma
of secreted antibodies, so that each class (and subclass) has characteristic prop-    membrane. The cells are now called pre-B
                                                                                                                             cells. Signaling from this pre-B cell receptor
erties of its own. IgM is always the first class of Ig that a developing B cell in the                                                                                                     allows the cells to make bona fide light
bone marrow makes. It forms the BCRs on the surface of immature naïve B cells.     chains, which combine with μ chains to
After these cells leave the bone marrow, they start to produce IgD BCRs as well,     form four-chain IgM molecules that serve
with the same antigen-binding site as the IgM BCRs. These cells are now called    as antigen-specific, cell-surface BCRs on
mature naïve B cells, as they can now respond to their specific foreign anti-    immature naïve B cells. After these cells
                                                                                                      leave the bone marrow (labeled in yellow
gen if they encounter it in a peripheral lymphoid organ (Figure 24–24). IgM is     shading), they start to express IgD BCRs as
also the major class of antibody secreted into the blood in the early stages of a      well, which have the same antigen-binding
primary antibody response on first exposure to an antigen. In its secreted form,      sites as the IgM BCRs; it is this mature
IgM is a wheel-like pentamer composed of five four-chain units, giving it a total     naïve B cell that reacts with its specific
                                                                                                            foreign antigen in peripheral lymphoidof 10 antigen-binding sites that allow it to bind strongly to pathogens; in its                                                                                           organs (labeled in blue shading).
antigen-bound form, IgM is highly efficient at activating complement, which is
important in early antibody responses to pathogens.
  IgM and IgD are the only classes of Igs made before a B cell is activated by
antigen, at which stage they are made only as BCRs. All the other Ig classes are
made only after antigen stimulation, as both BCRs and antibodies. IgG antibodies
are four-chain monomers (see Figure 24–23), and they are secreted into the blood
in especially large quantities during secondary antibody responses to most anti-
gens. The tail region of some subclasses of IgG antibodies that are bound to antigen
can activate complement and also bind to specific receptors on macrophages and
neutrophils. Largely by means of such Fc receptors (so named because antibody
tails are called Fc regions), these phagocytic cells bind, ingest, and destroy infect-
ing microorganisms that have become coated with the IgG antibodies produced
in response to the infection (see Figure 24–5); the activated Fc receptors also
signal the phagocyte to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines (Movie 24.4).
   IgE antibodies are produced in response to parasites and, in genetically sus-
ceptible individuals, to otherwise harmless environmental antigens (allergens)
such as pollen, foods, and drugs. The IgE tail region binds to another class of Fc
receptors on the surface of mast cells in tissues and of basophils in the blood (see
Figures 22–11 and 22–12). Because antigen-free IgE antibodies bind with high
affinity to such Fc receptors, the antibodies act as acquired antigen receptors on
these cells. Antigen binding to the bound antibodies activates the Fc receptors and
stimulates the cells to secrete a variety of cytokines and biologically active amines,
especially histamine, which causes blood vessels to dilate and become leaky;
this helps leukocytes, antibodies, and complement components to enter sites

=== Original PDF page 1414 ===
B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                                                           1375



 TABLE 24–2 Properties of the Major Classes of Antibodies in Humans

                                                                    Class of antibody

  Properties                                IgM             IgD         IgG (1–4)        IgA (1, 2)      IgE

 Heavy chains                          μ               δ           γ (1–4)        α (1, 2)         ε

  Light chains                               κ or λ          κ or λ         κ or λ         κ or λ      κ or λ

 Number of four-chain units                     5              1             1           1 or 2        1


 Mean blood serum level (mg/mL)                   1.5              0.04         IgG1 = 9           2.1      3 × 10–5
                                                                          IgG2 = 3
                                                                          IgG3 = 1
                                                                             IG4 = 0.5

  Activates classical complement pathway       +               –      + (IgG1–3)          –           –

 Crosses from mother to fetus                      –                –    + (all subclasses)       –           –

 Binds to macrophages and neutrophils   + (macrophages only)       –    + (all subclasses)    +          –

 Binds to mast cells and basophils                  –                –    + (IgG1 and IgG3)       –      +


where mast cells have been activated. The release of amines from mast cells and
basophils is largely responsible for the symptoms of such allergic reactions as hay
fever, asthma, and hives. In addition, mast cells secrete factors that attract and
activate eosinophils (see Figures 22–11 and 22–12), which also have Fc receptors
that bind IgE molecules and can kill extracellular parasitic worms, especially if the
worms are coated with IgE antibodies (see Figure 24–6).
   IgA is the principal antibody class in secretions, including saliva, tears, milk,
and respiratory and intestinal tract secretions. Yet another class of Fc recep-
tors, located on the relevant epithelial cells, guides the secretion by binding
antigen-free IgA dimers and transporting them from the extracellular fluid across
the epithelium by the process of transcytosis (see Figure 13–56). Some of this IgA
is directed against commensal microbes and keeps them in check by prevent-
ing them from binding to mucosal epithelial cells. The properties of the various
classes of antibodies in humans are summarized in Table 24–2.

Ig Light and Heavy Chains of Antibodies Consist of Constant
and Variable Regions

Both the light and heavy chains of antibodies have a variable amino acid
sequence at their N-terminal ends but a constant sequence at their C-terminal
ends. Whereas the constant region and variable region of a light chain are the
same size, the constant region of a heavy chain is about three or four times longer
than its variable region, depending on the class (Figure 24–25).
                                                                                             Figure 24–25 Constant and variable
   The variable regions of the light and heavy chains come together to form the                                                                                            regions of antibody chains. The variable
antigen-binding sites, and the variability of their amino acid sequences provides     regions of both the light and heavy chains
the structural basis for the diversity of these binding sites. The greatest diversity     form the antigen-binding sites, while the
                                                                                                constant regions of the heavy chains
                                                                                              determine the other functional properties
                  LIGHT CHAIN                                                                            of an antibody molecule. The different
                         variable      constant                                                     subclasses of IgG antibodies have different
                        region       region (κ type or λ type)                                         γ-chain constant regions. An individual Ig
                                                                                                          protein has either κ or λ light chains but not
            H2N                      COOH                                                                                                    both. Note that the heavy chain of the BCR
               HEAVY CHAIN         hinge region                                           form of each class of Ig has an additional,
                                                                                      transmembrane domain at its C-terminus            H2N                                        COOH
                                                                                                               (not shown), and the constant regions of
                     variable region             constant region                                        the μ and ε heavy chains do not have a
                                                        (α, δ, ε, γ, or µ type)                                     hinge region (not shown).

=== Original PDF page 1415 ===
1376   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                 variable region                        hypervariable regions                          Figure 24–26 Ig hypervariable regions.
                of heavy chain                            of heavy chain                                Highly schematized drawing of how the
                                hypervariable                                                           three hypervariable regions in each light
                                regions                                                    and heavy chain together form each
                                                                                     antigen-binding  antigen-binding site of an Ig protein.
                                                                                                          site


                           S S  S         S
variable     S     S S  S
region of
light chain                                                                              hypervariable
                                                                                        regions of
                                                                                                    light chain




occurs in three small hypervariable regions in the variable regions of both light
and heavy chains. Only about 5–10 amino acids in each hypervariable region
form the actual antigen-binding site (Figure 24–26). As a result, the size of the
antigenic determinant that an Ig molecule recognizes is generally small: it can
consist of fewer than 10 amino acids on the surface of a globular protein, for
example (see Figure 24–22).
   Both light and heavy chains are made up of repeating segments—each about
110 amino acids long and each containing one intrachain disulfide bond. Each
repeating segment folds independently to form a compact functional unit called
an immunoglobulin (Ig) domain. As shown in Figure 24–27A, a light chain con-
sists of one variable (VL) and one constant (CL) domain, whereas a heavy chain

                 VH                 VH                                                                   hypervariable loops

     S               S                                            NH2
      S              S
                          CH1  CH1
   S                    S
    S                  S
         S       S
VL         S      S                       VL

       S            S
        S  S    S S  S  S
          S     S S  S
           CL                                            CL

                             S       S
                CH2        S       S                                                                                variable domain
                                                                                                                of light chain (VL)                                                           disulﬁde
                                       CH2          bond

                CH3        S       S                             S       S       CH3

    (A)


                                                                                      constant domain
                                                                                      of light chain (CL)
                                               COOH

                                                                 (B)

Figure 24–27 Ig domains. (A) The light and heavy chains in an Ig protein are each folded into similar repeating domains.
The variable domains (shaded in blue) of the light and heavy chains (VL and VH) make up the antigen-binding sites, while the
constant domains (shaded in gray) of the heavy chains (mainly CH2 and CH3) determine the other functional properties of the
protein. The heavy chains of IgM and IgE do not have a hinge region and have an extra constant domain (CH4—not shown).
Hydrophobic interactions between domains on adjacent chains help hold the chains together in the Ig molecule: VL binds to
VH, CL binds to CH1, and so on. (B) X-ray crystallography–based structures of the Ig domains of a light chain (Movie 24.5).
The variable and constant domains have a similar overall structure, consisting of two β sheets joined by a disulfide bond (red).
Note that all the hypervariable regions (black) form loops at the far end of the variable domain, where they come together to
form part of the antigen-binding site. All Igs are glycosylated on their CH2 domains (not shown); the attached oligosaccharide
chains vary from Ig to Ig and can greatly influence the functional properties of the protein, mainly by affecting its binding to Fc
receptors on immune cells.

=== Original PDF page 1416 ===
B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                                                           1377


has one variable and three or four constant domains: the variable domains of the
light and heavy chains pair to form the antigen-binding region. Each Ig domain
has a very similar three-dimensional structure, consisting of a sandwich of two β
sheets held together by a disulfide bond; the variable domains are unique in that
each has its particular set of hypervariable regions, which are arranged in three
hypervariable loops that cluster together at the ends of the variable domains to
form the antigen-binding site (Figure 24–27B).

Ig Genes Are Assembled from Separate Gene Segments
During B Cell Development
Prior to antigen stimulation, the human primary Ig repertoire is probably
composed of more than 1012 different BCRs. This repertoire consists of IgM
and IgD proteins and is apparently large enough to ensure that there will be an
antigen-binding site to fit almost any potential antigenic determinant, albeit with
low affinity (Ka ≈ 105–107 liters/mole). After stimulation by antigen and helper
T cells, B cells can switch from making IgM and IgD to making other classes of
Ig—a process called class switching. In addition, the binding affinity of these
Igs for their antigen progressively increases over time—a process called affinity
maturation. Thus, antigen stimulation generates a secondary Ig repertoire, with
a greatly increased affinity (Ka up to 1011 liters/mole) and a greater diversity of
both Ig classes and antigen-binding sites.
  How can each of us make so many different Igs? The problem is not quite as
formidable as it might first appear. Recall that the variable regions of the Ig light
and heavy chains usually combine to form the antigen-binding site. Thus, if we
had 1000 genes encoding light chains and 1000 genes encoding heavy chains, we
could, in principle, combine their products in 1000 × 1000 different ways to make
106 different antigen-binding sites. Nonetheless, we have evolved special genetic
mechanisms to enable our B cells to generate an almost unlimited number of dif-
ferent light and heavy chains in a remarkably economical way. We do so in two
steps. First, before antigen stimulation, developing B cells join together separate
gene segments in DNA to create the genes that encode the primary repertoire of
low-affinity IgM and IgD proteins. Second, after antigen stimulation, the assem-
bled Ig genes can undergo two further changes—point mutations that can increase
the affinity of their antigen-binding site and DNA rearrangements that switch the
class of Ig made. Together, these changes produce the secondary repertoire of
high-affinity IgG, IgE, and IgA proteins.
  We produce our primary Ig repertoire by joining separate Ig gene segments
together during B cell development. Each type of Ig chain—κ light chains, λ light
chains, and heavy chains—is encoded by a separate locus on a separate chromo-
some. Each locus contains a large number of gene segments encoding the V region
of an Ig chain and one or more gene segments encoding the C region. During the
development of a B cell in the bone marrow, a complete coding sequence for each
of the two Ig chains to be synthesized is assembled by site-specific genetic recom-
bination (discussed in Chapter 5). Once a V-region coding sequence is assembled
next to a C-region sequence, it can then be co-transcribed and the resulting RNA
transcript processed to produce an mRNA molecule that codes for the complete
Ig polypeptide chain.
   Each light-chain V region, for example, is encoded by a DNA sequence
assembled from two gene segments—a long V gene segment and a short joining
segment, or J gene segment (Figure 24–28). Each heavy-chain V region is simi-
larly constructed by combining gene segments, but here an additional diversity
segment, or D gene segment, is also required (Figure 24–29). In addition to bring-
ing together the separate gene segments of the Ig gene, these rearrangements also
activate transcription from the gene promoter through changes in the relative
positions of the cis-regulatory DNA sequences acting on the gene. Thus, a com-
plete Ig chain can be synthesized only after the DNA has been rearranged.
   The large number of inherited V, J, and D gene segments available for encoding
Ig chains contributes substantially to Ig diversity, and the combinatorial joining of

=== Original PDF page 1417 ===
1378   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                                         regions of DNA to be joined                                 Figure 24–28 The V–J joining process
                                                                                             involved in making a human k light
    germ-line DNA                                                                                         3′           chain. In the “germ-line” DNA (where 5′
                                                                                                    the Ig gene segments are not rearranged
     V1         V2        V3        V~35                           C                                                                                   and are therefore not being expressed),
                                                                     J1 J2  J3 J4  J5                      the cluster of five J gene segments (green)
                                                                                                                                       is separated from the C-region coding
                                                   DNA REARRANGEMENT      sequence (purple) by a short intron
                                                           DURING B CELL            and from the 35 or so functional V gene
                                                         DEVELOPMENT            segments (red) by thousands of nucleotide
                                                                                                                   pairs. During the development of a
                                            5′                                                                 3′        B cell, a randomly chosen V gene segment
                    B cell DNA                                                                (V3 in this case) is moved to lie precisely
                                   V1         V2        V3        C                    next to one of the J gene segments (J3 in
                                                                            J3 J4 J5
                                                                                                                        this case). The “extra” J gene segments
                                                                                                        (J4 and J5) and the intron sequence are
                                                                TRANSCRIPTION              transcribed (along with the joined V3 and
                                                                                     J3 gene segments and the C-region coding
                                                                                           sequence) and then removed by RNA
                                                                                   5′                   3′                                                                                                                splicing to generate mRNA molecules with                                       RNA transcript
                                                        V3        C                   contiguous V3, J3, and C sequences, as
                                                                            J3 J4 J5                    shown. These mRNAs are then translated
                                                                                                                  into κ light chains. A J gene segment
                                                                                     encodes the 15 or so C-terminal amino
                                                      RNA SPLICING
                                                                                                   acids of the V region, and a short sequence
                                                                                                      containing the V–J segment junction
                                                                                     5′         3′                    encodes the third hypervariable region,
                                          mRNA                              which is the most variable part of the
                                                        V3 J3 C                            light-chain V region.


                                                             TRANSLATION


                                                      NH2      COOH
                                                                  light chain
                                                        V3 J3 C


these segments (called combinatorial diversification) greatly increases this con-
tribution. Any of the 35 or so functional V segments in our κ light-chain locus, for
example, can be joined to any of the 5 J segments (see Figure 24–28), so that this
locus can encode at least 175 (35 × 5) different κ-chain V regions. Similarly, any
of the 40 V segments in the human heavy-chain locus can be joined to any of the
                                                                                             Figure 24–29 The human heavy-chain
23 or so D segments and to any of the 6 J segments to encode at least 5520 (40 ×     locus. There are 40 V segments, about 23
23 × 6) different heavy-chain V regions. By this mechanism alone, called V(D)J   D segments, 6 J segments, and an ordered
recombination, a human can produce 295 different VL regions (175 κ and 120 λ)      cluster of C-region coding sequences,
and 5520 different VH regions. In principle, these could then be combined to make    each cluster encoding a different class
                                                                                                              of heavy chain. The D segment (and partmore than 1.6 × 106 (295 × 5520) different antigen-binding sites.                                                                                                              of the J segment) encodes amino acids
   V(D)J recombination is mediated by an enzyme complex called V(D)J recom-      in the third hypervariable region, which
binase, which recognizes recombination signal sequences in the DNA that flanks       is the most variable part of the heavy-
each gene segment to be joined. Although the process ensures that only appropri-     chain V region. The genetic mechanisms
ate gene segments recombine, a variable number of nucleotides are often lost from     involved in producing a heavy chain are
                                                                                                    the same as those shown in Figure 24–28the ends of the recombining gene segments, and one or more randomly chosen                                                                                                                       for light chains, except that two DNA
nucleotides are also inserted. This random loss and gain of nucleotides at joining     rearrangement steps are required instead
sites is called junctional diversification, and it greatly increases the diversity of      of one: first a D segment joins to a
V-region coding sequences created by V(D)J recombination (between 107-fold    J segment, and then a V segment joins
and 108-fold), specifically in the third hypervariable region. This increased diver-     to the rearranged DJ segment. The
                                                                                             rearrangements lead to the production of
sification comes at a price, however. In many cases, it shifts the reading frame to                                                                                       a VDJC mRNA that encodes a complete
produce a nonfunctional gene, in which case the developing B cell fails to make      Ig heavy chain. The figure is not drawn
a functional Ig molecule and consequently dies in the bone marrow by apopto-     to scale: the total length of the heavy-
sis. Once a B cell makes a functional heavy chain and light chain that form an     chain locus is more than 2 megabases.
                                                                                               Moreover, a number of details are omitted;
                                                                                                                       for example, the exons encoding each
                                                                                                 C-region Ig domain and the hinge region
    V1  V2     V40          D1 D2 D~23 J1       J6  Cµ    Cδ    Cγ     Cε    Cα                                                                                                      (see Figure 24–27) and the different
5′                                                                                                                       3′    subclasses of Cγ-coding segments are
   germ-line DNA                                                                                 not shown.

=== Original PDF page 1418 ===
B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                                                           1379


antigen-binding site, it turns off the V(D)J recombination process, thereby ensur-
ing that the cell makes Ig of only one antigen-binding specificity.
  B cells making BCRs that bind strongly to self antigens in the bone marrow
would be dangerous. Such B cells are signaled by the self-binding to maintain
expression of an active V(D)J recombinase and undergo a second round of
V(D)J recombination in a light-chain locus, thereby changing the specificity of
its BCR—in the process of receptor editing discussed earlier; self-reactive B cells
that fail to change their specificity die by apoptosis, in the process of clonal
deletion (see Figure 24–21).

Antigen-driven Somatic Hypermutation Fine-Tunes
Antibody Responses

As mentioned earlier, with the passage of time after an infection or vaccination,
there is usually a progressive increase in the affinity of the antibodies produced
against the pathogen. This phenomenon of affinity maturation is due to the
accumulation of point mutations in both heavy-chain and light-chain V-region
coding sequences. The mutations occur long after the coding regions have been
assembled. After B cells have been stimulated by both antigen and helper T cells
in a peripheral lymphoid organ, some of the activated B cells proliferate rapidly in
some lymphoid follicles and form germinal centers (see Figure 24–20). Here, the
B cells mutate at the rate of about one mutation per V-region coding sequence
per cell generation. Because this is about a million times greater than the sponta-
neous mutation rate in other genes and occurs in somatic cells rather than germ
cells, the process is called somatic hypermutation.
   Very few of the altered Igs generated by hypermutation will have an increased
affinity for the antigen. However, the antigen will stimulate preferentially those
few B cells that do make BCRs with increased affinity for the antigen. Clones of
these altered B cells will preferentially survive and proliferate, especially as the
amount of antigen decreases to very low levels late in the response. Most other
B cells in the germinal center will die by apoptosis. Thus, as a result of repeated
cycles of somatic hypermutation followed by antigen-driven proliferation of
selected clones of effector and memory B cells, BCRs and antibodies of increas-
ingly higher affinity become abundant during an adaptive immune response,
providing progressively better protection against the pathogen (Movie 24.6).
  A breakthrough in understanding the molecular mechanism of somatic
hypermutation came with the identification of an enzyme that is required for the
process. It is called activation-induced deaminase (AID) because it is expressed
specifically in activated B cells and deaminates cytosine (C) to uracil (U) during
transcription of V-region coding DNA. The deamination produces U:G mis-
matches in the DNA double helix, and the repair of these mismatches produces
various types of mutations, depending on the repair pathway used. Somatic
hypermutation affects only actively transcribed DNA, both because AID works
only on single-stranded DNA (which is transiently exposed during transcription)
and because proteins involved in the transcription of V-region coding sequences
are required to recruit the AID enzyme. AID is also required for activated B cells
to switch from IgM and IgD production to the production of the other classes of
Ig, as we now discuss.

B Cells Can Switch the Class of Ig They Make

After a developing B cell leaves the bone marrow, but before it interacts with
antigen, it expresses both IgM and IgD BCRs on its surface, both with the same
antigen-binding sites (see Figure 24–24). Stimulation by antigen and helper T cells
in a peripheral lymphoid organ activates many of these mature naïve B cells to
become IgM-secreting effector cells, so that IgM antibodies dominate the primary
antibody response. Later in the immune response, however, when the activated
B cells are undergoing somatic hypermutation in germinal centers, the com-
bination of antigen and cytokines derived from helper T cells (discussed later)

=== Original PDF page 1419 ===
1380   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


stimulates many of the B cells to switch from making membrane-bound IgM and
IgD to making IgG, IgE, or IgA, in the process of class switching. Some of these
cells become memory cells that express the corresponding class of Ig as BCRs
on their surface, while others become effector cells that secrete the Ig molecules
as antibodies. The IgG, IgE, and IgA molecules initially retain their original anti-
gen-binding sites, which can then undergo affinity maturation in the germinal
centers. These class-switched Igs are collectively referred to as secondary classes of
Igs, because they are produced only after antigen stimulation, dominate second-
ary antibody responses, and make up the secondary Ig repertoire.
   As discussed earlier, the constant region of an Ig heavy chain determines the
class of the Ig and hence the Ig’s functional properties. Thus, the ability of B cells
to switch the class of Ig they make without changing their antigen specificity
implies that the same assembled VH-region coding sequence (which specifies
the antigen-binding part of the heavy chain) can sequentially associate with
different CH-coding sequences. This has important functional implications. It
means that, in an individual animal, a particular antigen-binding site that has
been selected by environmental antigens can be distributed among the vari-
ous classes of antibodies, thereby acquiring the different functional properties
of each class. In this way, antipathogen antibodies harness a variety of effector
mechanisms to help clear the pathogen, including activation of the complement
system and Fc receptors on phagocytes and other innate immune cells (see
Table 24–2).
  When a B cell switches from making IgM and IgD to one of the secondary
classes of Ig, an irreversible change occurs in the DNA—a process called class
switch recombination. It entails the deletion of all the CH-coding sequences
between the assembled VDJ-coding sequence and the particular CH-coding
sequence that the cell is destined to express. Class switch recombination differs
from V(D)J recombination in several ways. (1) It happens after antigen stim-
ulation, mainly in germinal centers, and depends on helper T cells. (2) It uses
different recombination signal sequences, called switch sequences, which flank
the different CH-coding segments. (3) It involves cutting and joining the switch
sequences, which are noncoding sequences, and leaves the assembled VH-region
coding sequence unchanged (Figure 24–30). (4) Most important, the molecu-
lar mechanism is different. It depends on AID, which is also involved in somatic
hypermutation, rather than on the V(D)J recombinase. The cytokines that activate
class switching induce the production of transcription regulators that activate
transcription from the relevant switch sequences, allowing the recruitment of


                                                                      VDJ Cµ           Figure 24–30 An example of the DNA      VDJ      Cµ      Cδ         Cγ        Cε       Cα
5′                                                                                      3′                  IgM    rearrangement that occurs in class
                                                                                          switch recombination. A B cell making DNA
                                         switch sequence                                       IgM (and IgD—not shown) molecules with
                                                                                                    the same heavy-chain V region encoded
                                 Cγ                                                      by a particular assembled VDJ DNA
                                                                                      sequence is stimulated to switch to making
                                                                                                IgA molecules with the same heavy-chain
                 Cδ                                                                            V region. In the process, it deletes the
                                                                   DNA between the VDJ sequence and
                                                                                                    the Cα-coding sequence. Specific DNA                    Cµ        Cε                             TRANSCRIPTION,                                                   RNA SPLICING,                sequences (switch sequences) located
                 5′                                          3′            AND TRANSLATION               upstream of each CH-coding sequence
         DNA   VDJ          Cα                                                               (except Cδ, as B cells don’t switch from
                                                    Cγ                                 Cμ to Cδ) can recombine with one another,
DNA DELETION BY CUTTING      AID                                                                  with the deletion of the intervening DNA,
AND REJOINING OF DNA              Cδ                 deleted                                as shown here. As discussed in the text,
 IN SWITCH SEQUENCES                         DNA                                       the recombination process depends on
                                                                                                   AID, the same enzyme that is involved in
                                     Cµ      Cε                                            somatic hypermutation. When switching
                                                                                             from IgM and IgD to IgG or IgE, the
                     VDJ       Cα                                      VDJ Cα            C-region coding sequences downstream
                      5′                                     3′                                         IgA      of Cγ or Cε, which remain after the DNA
              DNA                                                                                     deletion, are removed during RNA splicing.

=== Original PDF page 1420 ===
B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                                                           1381


AID to these sites. Once bound, AID initiates switch recombination by deami-                   combinatorial
nating some cytosines to uracil in the vicinity of these switch sequences. Excision                    joining of gene
of these uracils is thought to lead to double-strand breaks in the participating                    segments
switch regions, which are then joined by a form of nonhomologous end joining
(discussed in Chapter 5).
   Thus, whereas the primary Ig repertoire in humans (and mice) is generated by               junctionalduringdiversiﬁcationgene-
V(D)J joining mediated by V(D)J recombinase, the secondary antibody repertoire                segment joining
is generated by somatic hypermutation and class switch recombination, both of
which are mediated by AID. Figure 24–31 lists the main mechanisms for diversi-
fying Igs that we have discussed in this chapter.                                                            combinatorial
                                                                                                                           joining of L and H
                                                                                                                             chains
Summary
Each B cell clone makes Ig molecules with a unique antigen-binding site. Initially,               somatic hypermutation
the Ig molecules are inserted into the plasma membrane and serve as B cell recep-                + class switch
tors (BCRs) for antigen. Antigen binding to the BCRs, together with co-stimulatory                  recombination
signals from helper T cells, activate the B cells to proliferate and differentiate into
                                                                                             Figure 24–31 The main mechanisms ofantibody-secreting effector cells or memory cells. The effector cells secrete large                                                                                                       Ig diversification in mice and humans.
amounts of antibodies with the same antigen-binding site as the BCRs.                Those shaded in gray occur during B cell
  A typical Ig molecule is composed of four polypeptide chains—two identical    development in the bone marrow, whereas
heavy chains and two identical light chains. Parts of both the heavy and light chains     the two mechanisms shaded in red occur
form the two identical antigen-binding sites. There are multiple classes of Ig (IgA,    when B cells are stimulated by foreign
                                                                                                    antigen and helper T cells in germinal
IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM), each with a distinctive heavy chain, which determines the                                                                                                   centers in peripheral lymphoid organs,
functional properties of the Ig class. Each light and heavy chain is composed of a      either late in a primary response or in a
number of similarly folded Ig domains. The amino acid sequence variation in the     secondary response.
variable domains of both light and heavy chains is concentrated in several small
hypervariable regions, which form loops at one end of these domains to form the
antigen-binding site.
    Igs are encoded by loci on three different chromosomes, each of which is respon-
sible for producing a different polypeptide chain—a k light chain, a l light chain,
or a heavy chain. Each locus contains separate gene segments that encode different
parts of the variable region of the particular Ig chain. Each light-chain locus con-
tains one or more constant (C)-region coding sequences and sets of variable (V)
and joining (J) gene segments. The heavy-chain locus contains sets of C-region cod-
ing sequences and sets of V, diversity (D), and J gene segments.
   During B cell development in the bone marrow, before foreign antigen stimu-
lation, separate gene segments are brought together by site-specific recombination
mediated by V(D)J recombinase. A VL gene segment recombines with a JL gene seg-
ment to produce a DNA sequence coding for the V region of a light chain, and a
VH gene segment recombines with a D and a JH gene segment to produce a DNA
sequence coding for the V region of a heavy chain. Each of the newly assembled
V-region coding sequences is then co-transcribed with the appropriate C-region
sequence to produce an RNA molecule that codes for the complete Ig polypeptide chain.
   By randomly combining inherited gene segments that code for the variable
regions during B cell development, we can make hundreds of different light chains
and thousands of different heavy chains. Because the antigen-binding site is
formed where the hypervariable loops of the VL and VH domains come together
in the final Ig molecule, the heavy and light chains can potentially pair to form
Igs with more than a million different antigen-binding sites. A loss or gain of
nucleotides at the site of gene-segment joining increases this number enormously.
The Igs made by such V(D)J recombination before antigen stimulation are IgMs
and IgDs with low affinity for binding antigen, and they constitute the primary
Ig repertoire.
    Igs are further diversified after antigen stimulation in peripheral lymphoid
organs by the AID-mediated and helper T cell–dependent processes of somatic hyper-
mutation and class switch recombination, which together produce the high-affinity
IgG, IgE, and IgA Igs that constitute the secondary Ig repertoire. The process of class
switching allows the same antigen-binding site to be incorporated into antibodies
that have different tails and therefore different functional properties.

=== Original PDF page 1421 ===
1382   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems

T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS
Like antibody responses, T cell–mediated immune responses are exquisitely
antigen specific, and they are at least as important as antibodies in defending ver-
tebrates against infection. Indeed, most adaptive immune responses, including
most antibody responses, require helper T cells for their initiation. Most import-
ant, unlike B cells, T cells can help eliminate pathogens that have entered the
interior of host cells, where they are invisible to B cells and antibodies. Much of
the rest of this chapter is concerned with how T cells accomplish this feat.
  T cell responses differ from B cell responses in at least two crucial ways. First,
a T cell is activated by foreign antigen to proliferate and differentiate into effector
cells only when the antigen is displayed on the surface of an antigen-presenting
cell (APC), usually a dendritic cell in a peripheral lymphoid organ. One reason
T cells require APCs for activation is that the form of antigen they recognize is
different from that recognized by the Igs produced by B cells. Whereas Igs can
recognize antigenic determinants on the surface of pathogens and soluble folded
proteins, for example, T cells can only recognize fragments of protein antigens
that have been produced by partial proteolysis inside a host cell. As mentioned
earlier, newly formed MHC proteins capture these peptide fragments and carry
them to the surface of the host cell, where T cells can recognize them.
   The second difference is that, once activated, effector T cells act mainly at
short range, usually contacting the cells they influence, either within a secondary
lymphoid organ or after they have migrated to a site of infection. Effector B cells,
by contrast, secrete antibodies that can act far away. Effector T cells interact
directly with another host cell in the body, which they either kill (if it is an infected
host cell, for example) or signal in some way (if it is a B cell or macrophage, for
example). We will refer to such host cells as target cells. As is the case with APCs,
target cells must display an antigen bound to an MHC protein on their surface for
a T cell to recognize them.
   There are three main classes of T cells—cytotoxic T cells, helper T cells, and
regulatory T cells. When activated, they develop into effector cells, each class
having its own distinct activities. Effector cytotoxic T cells directly kill cells that
are infected with an intracellular pathogen. Effector helper T cells help stimulate
the responses of other immune cells—mainly macrophages, dendritic cells, and
B cells; as we will see, there are various functionally distinct subtypes of effector
helper T cells. Effector regulatory T cells suppress the activity of other immune
cells. After functioning, some effector T cells become memory T cells.
   In this section, we discuss how T cells recognize foreign antigens on the
surface of APCs or target cells and the crucial part played by MHC proteins in the
recognition process. We describe the different classes and subclasses of T cells
and their respective functions and how T cells start their development in the
thymus. We begin by considering the cell-surface receptors that T cells use to
recognize antigen.

T Cell Receptors (TCRs) Are Ig-like Heterodimers
T cell receptors (TCRs), unlike Igs made by B cells, exist only in membrane-bound
form. They are composed of two transmembrane, disulfide-linked polypeptide
chains, each of which contains two Ig-like domains—one variable and one con-
stant. On most T cells, the TCRs have one α chain and one β chain (Figure 24–32).
   The genetic loci that encode the α and β chains are located on different chro-
mosomes. Like an Ig heavy-chain locus (see Figure 24–29), the TCR loci contain
separate V, D, and J gene segments (or just V and J gene segments in the case
of the α-chain locus), which are brought together by site-specific recombina-
tion during T cell development in the thymus. With one exception, T cells use
the same mechanisms to generate antigen-binding-site diversity of their TCRs
as B cells use to generate antigen-binding-site diversity of their Igs, and they use
the same V(D)J recombinase; thus, humans or mice deficient in this recombinase
cannot make functional B or T cells. The mechanism that does not operate in TCR
diversification is antigen-driven somatic hypermutation. Therefore, the affinities

=== Original PDF page 1422 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1383


        antigen-binding site                                                                     Figure 24–32 A T cell receptor (TCR)
                                                                                              heterodimer. (A) Schematic drawing
 α chain    H2N  NH2     β chain                                                                          of a TCR composed of an α and a
                                                                          β polypeptide chain. Each chain has a
 Vα          SS     SS           Vβ                          S                                           large extracellular part that is folded into
             SS     SS                                           S                                two Ig-like domains—one variable and                                             Vα                                  Vβ
                                                                                    one constant. A Vα and a Vβ domain                                                                                S  S                                                                                            (shaded in blue) form the antigen-binding
                                                                                                                                site. Unlike Igs, which have two binding
             SS     SS                                                                                            sites for antigen, TCRs have only one.
 Cα          SS     SS            Cβ                                                               Although not shown, the αβ-heterodimer is
                                                                                                    noncovalently associated with a large set
                       EXTRACELLULAR                                                                of invariant membrane-bound proteins that
               S S            SPACE                                                              help activate the T cell when the TCRs bind
                                                                                                                          their specific antigen (see Figure 24–45B).
                                                                       A typical T cell has about 30,000 TCRs
                                plasma                                                 on its surface. (B) The three-dimensional
                            membrane
                                                                                                           structure of the extracellular part of a TCR.
                                                             S                      Cβ             The antigen-binding site is formed by the
                                              Cα          S                                         hypervariable loops of both the Vα and Vβ
                                                                                      domains (black), located at the distal
                                                                                   end of the domains, and it is similar in its
     COOH         COOH                                                                               overall dimensions and geometry to the
            CYTOSOL                                        S  S                                   antigen-binding site of an Ig molecule.
   (A)                                                     (B)                                                       (B, PDB code: 1TCR.)

of TCRs tend to be low (Ka ≈ 105–107 liters/mole). Various co-receptors and cell–
cell adhesion proteins, however, greatly strengthen the binding of a T cell to an
APC or target cell. TCRs also do not diversify by class switching.
   Instead of making TCR α and β chains, a minority of T cells makes a differ-
ent but related type of TCR heterodimer, composed of γ chains and δ chains.
Although these gd T cells normally make up only 5–10% of the T cells in human
blood, they can be the dominant T cell population in epithelia such as the skin.
They differ from conventional αβ T cells in other important ways: their surface
receptors have restricted diversity and generally do not recognize antigens as
peptides presented by MHC proteins. We will not discuss them further, so that,
from here on, when we refer to T cells, we mean T cells with αβ TCRs.
   As with BCRs, TCRs are tightly associated in the plasma membrane with a
number of invariant membrane-bound proteins that are involved in passing the      (A)                             5 µm
signal from an antigen-activated receptor to the cell interior. We will discuss these                                                                                                                    T cells
proteins in more detail later, when we consider some of the molecular events
involved in T and B cell activation. First, we consider the special ways in which
T cells recognize foreign antigen on the surface of an APC or target cell.

Activated Dendritic Cells Activate Naïve T Cells

Generally, naïve T cells, including naïve helper and cytotoxic T cells, proliferate
and differentiate into effector cells and memory cells only when they see their
specific antigen on the surface of an activated dendritic cell in a peripheral lym-
phoid organ (Figure 24–33). The activated dendritic cell displays the antigen in
a complex with MHC proteins on its surface, along with co-stimulatory proteins
(see Figure 24–11). The memory T cells that develop, however, can be re-activated
by the same antigen–MHC complex on the surface of other types of APCs (target      (B)        dendritic cell          20 µm
cells), including macrophages and B cells—as well as by dendritic cells.
   Immature dendritic cells are located in most tissues—underlying epithe-     Figure 24–33 Dendritic cells.
lial layers of the skin and gut, for example—where they are constantly sampling      (A) Immunofluorescence micrograph of
                                                                                       a mouse dendritic cell in culture. These
and processing proteins in their environment. They become activated to mature                                                                          APCs derive their name from their long
when their pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) encounter pathogen-associated     processes, or “dendrites.” The cell has
molecular patterns (PAMPs) on an invading pathogen or its products. The patho-    been labeled with a monoclonal antibody
gen or products are ingested, and the microbial proteins are cleaved into peptide     that recognizes a surface antigen on these
fragments, which are loaded onto MHC proteins, as we discuss later. The activated      cells. (B) Scanning electron micrograph of
                                                                                 T cells bound to the surface of an activated
dendritic cells then migrate via the lymph from the site of infection to local lymph                                                                                                             dendritic cell in a mouse lymph node.
nodes or gut-associated lymphoid organs, a process aided by the expression of      (A, courtesy of David Katz; B, courtesy of I.
the chemokine receptor CCR7. Here, they present the foreign antigens, displayed     Mellman, P. Pierres, and S. Turley.)

=== Original PDF page 1423 ===
1384   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                            receptor for                                                                                             Figure 24–34 The three general types                              co-stimulatory    foreign peptide
                             protein          (antigen)                                                of proteins on the surface of an
                                                                                               activated dendritic cell involved in
                                  TCR   MHC                                                 activating a T cell. Although not shown,
                                                 protein                                                activated dendritic cells also secrete
                                                                                                        soluble cytokines that influence the
                                                                                 T cell activation process. The invariant
                                                                                                   polypeptide chains that are always stably
                                                                                                 associated with the TCR are also not
                                                                                      shown; they are discussed later and
                                                                                                                         illustrated in Figure 24–45B and
                                                                                Movie 24.7.



                                           cell–cell           co-stimulatory
                                 adhesion          protein
                                    proteins

                                              ACTIVATED                       T CELL                                               DENDRITIC CELL


as peptide–MHC complexes on the dendritic cell surface, for recognition by the
relevant T cells (see Figure 24–11).
   Activated dendritic cells display three types of protein molecules on their
surface that have a role in activating a T cell to become an effector cell or mem-
ory cell (Figure 24–34): (1) MHC proteins, which present foreign peptides to the
TCRs; (2) co-stimulatory proteins, which bind to complementary receptors on the
T cell surface; and (3) cell–cell adhesion molecules, which enable a T cell to bind
to the dendritic cell for long enough to become activated, typically several hours
or more. In addition, activated dendritic cells secrete a variety of cytokines that
influence the type of effector helper T cell that develops, and different types of
dendritic cells promote different outcomes (discussed later).

T Cells Recognize Foreign Peptides Bound to MHC Proteins
As discussed earlier (see Figure 24–11), MHC proteins capture intracellular
peptide fragments of foreign proteins and display them on a cell surface for
presentation to T cells. There are two main classes of MHC proteins, which are
structurally and functionally distinct. Class I MHC proteins mainly present for-
eign peptides to cytotoxic T cells, whereas class II MHC proteins mainly present
foreign peptides to helper and regulatory T cells (Figure 24–35). Some class I–like
MHC proteins present microbial lipid and glycolipid antigens to T cells, but these
proteins are not encoded within the MHC region of the genome, and we will not
consider them further.
   Both class I and class II MHC proteins are heterodimers, in which two extracel-
lular domains form a peptide-binding groove, which always has a variable small
peptide noncovalently bound in it. In class I MHC proteins, the two domains that
form the peptide-binding groove are provided by the transmembrane α chain,
which is noncovalently associated with a small subunit called b2-microglobulin;

                                                                                             Figure 24–35 Recognition by T cells               CYTOTOXIC T CELL                  HELPER OR REGULATORY T CELL
                                                                                                   of peptides bound to MHC proteins.
                                                                                                    Cytotoxic T (TC) cells recognize foreign
                          TC                                         TH                           peptides in association with class I MHC
                                                                                                             proteins, whereas helper T (TH) cells                             TCR                                   TCR
                                                                                                  recognize foreign peptides in association
           class I                                                   class II                                         with class II MHC proteins; regulatory
      MHC                 bound          MHC              bound                                                                                 T cells also recognize self or foreign         protein                  peptide              protein               peptide
                                                                                                 peptides in association with class II MHC
                                                                                                             proteins. In all cases, the T cell recognizes
                                                                                                    the peptide–MHC complexes on the
                                                                                                    surface of an APC—either a dendritic cell
                                                                                                       or a target cell. Different types of dendritic
                                               dendritic cell                                                       cells activate naïve cytotoxic and helper
                                            or target cell                                     T cells (not shown).

=== Original PDF page 1424 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1385



                 peptide bound in                                  peptide bound in                                     peptide in
                  peptide-binding groove                             peptide-binding groove                                peptide-binding
                                                                                                                 groove
            α1                         α2                      α1                             β1
                                S  S                                                S  S

                                                                          NH2
                   NH2                             H2N                               NH2
                      S      S               Ig-like                           S     S
       β2-             S      S          domain               α2         S     S           β2
 microglobulin                         α3
                                    EXTRACELLULAR
            HOOC                     SPACE


                                            plasma
                                     membrane

                                                                                                                   NH2


                                      CYTOSOL         COOH         COOH                              COOH            α chain
                        COOH                       α chain      β chain
                                                                                                                              (C)  TOP VIEW OF BINDING GROOVE
                                                                                        OF CLASS I MHC PROTEIN WITH
               (A) CLASS I MHC PROTEIN                                 (B) CLASS II MHC PROTEIN               BOUND PEPTIDE

Figure 24–36 Class I and class II MHC proteins. (A) The transmembrane α chain of the class I molecule has three
extracellular domains, α1, α2, and α3, each encoded by a separate exon. The α chain is noncovalently associated with a
smaller, nontransmembrane polypeptide chain, β2-microglobulin, which is not encoded within the MHC region of the genome.
The α3 domain and β2-microglobulin are Ig-like. While β2-microglobulin is invariant, the α chain is extremely polymorphic,
mainly in the α1 and α2 domains. (B) In class II MHC proteins, both the α chain and the β chain are transmembrane
polypeptides encoded within the MHC and are polymorphic, mainly in the α1 and β1 domains; the α2 and β2 domains are
Ig-like. Thus, there are striking similarities between class I and class II MHC proteins: in both, the two outermost domains
(shaded in blue) are polymorphic and interact to form a groove that binds peptide fragments. The S–S disulfide bonds in A
and B are shown in red. (C) Top view of the three-dimensional structure of the peptide-binding groove of a human class I
MHC protein (green) with a bound peptide (red), as would be seen by a TCR on a cytotoxic T cell. Two α helices form the
sides of the groove, and a β pleated sheet forms the groove’s floor (Movie 24.8 and Movie 24.9). (C, PDB code: 1FZK.)


in class II MHC proteins, a different α chain and a large, noncovalently associ-
ated β chain each contribute an extracellular domain to form the peptide-binding
                                                                                             Figure 24–37 Human MHC genes. Thisgroove (Figure 24–36). A TCR binds to both the peptide and the ridges of the bind-                                                                                                                 simplified schematic drawing shows the
ing groove. Humans have three major class I proteins, called HLA-A, HLA-B, and     location of the genes that encode the
HLA-C, and three class II proteins, called HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, and HLA-DR (HLA    transmembrane subunits of class I (light
stands for human leukocyte antigen, as these proteins were first demonstrated     green) and class II (dark green) MHC
on human leukocytes). Figure 24–37 shows how the genes that encode these     proteins. The genes shown encode the
                                                                                                        three main types of class I MHC proteins
proteins are arranged in the MHC region of human chromosome 6.                                                                                               (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C) and three types
   There are important differences between the class I and class II MHC proteins      of class II MHC proteins (HLA-DP, HLA-DQ,
with regard to the cell types that express them and the origin of the peptides in their    and HLA-DR). An individual can therefore
peptide-binding grooves. Almost all of our nucleated cells express class I proteins.    make six types of class I MHC proteins
Their peptide-binding groove displays one of a diverse collection of peptides (typ-      (three encoded by maternal genes and
                                                                                                        three by paternal genes) and more than six
ically 8–10 amino acids in length). In a healthy cell, the peptides originate from the     types of class II MHC proteins. Because
                                                                                                               of the extreme polymorphism of the MHC
                                                                                              genes, the chances are very low that the
                                                                                                maternal and paternal alleles will be the
                                    class II MHC genes                              class I MHC genes            same. The number of class II MHC proteins
                                                                                                             that an individual can make is greater than                 HLA-DP        HLA-DQ HLA-DR           HLA-B  HLA-C     HLA-A                                                                                                                      six because there are two DRb genes
                   β α            β α   β β α                                       and because maternally encoded and
     human                                                                                                paternally encoded polypeptide chains can
     chromosome 6                                                                     sometimes pair. The entire region shown
                                                                                       spans about 7 million base pairs and
                                          HLA complex                                  contains other genes that are not shown.

=== Original PDF page 1425 ===
1386   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



                                                                                                          cytotoxic T cell


          VIRUS INFECTION                  plasma                                   TCR       RECOGNITION OF VIRAL-PEPTIDE–MHC
                                      membrane                                      COMPLEX BY CYTOTOXIC T CELL               viral RNA      internal viral
 viral envelope              protein                                                                                dendritic or target cell

CYTOSOL
                    ENDOCYTOSIS AND                                                        TRANSPORT OF PEPTIDE–MHC
                                                                       assembled class I                COMPLEX THROUGH GOLGI                      DELIVERY TO ENDOSOME
                                                  MHC protein with                APPARATUS TO CELL SURFACE
     endosome                                                 bound viral
                                                                          peptide

                                                                                                                     Golgi apparatus
                       FUSION OF VIRUS WITH ENDOSOME
                   MEMBRANE AND ESCAPE OF VIRAL
                    RNA AND PROTEIN INTO CYTOSOL
                                                                                                BINDING OF PEPTIDE TO
              endosome                                                                       α CHAIN STABILIZES ASSEMBLY OF
                                                                                             α CHAIN WITH β2-MICROGLOBULIN;
                                                                                              PEPTIDE–MHC COMPLEX IS THEN
     REPLICATION AND                                                                       TRANSPORTED TO THE GOLGI
     TRANSLATION OF                                                                       APPARATUS
     VIRAL RNA
                                              internal                              ER
                  RNA                 viral protein
                                                                                                                     β2-microglobulin

                                                                                                                           class I MHC α chain                                                        ABC transporter

                         PROTEOLYSIS OF                                           ACTIVE TRANSPORT
                    SOME VIRAL PROTEIN                                   OF PEPTIDES INTO
                       MOLECULES BY                                           viral          ER LUMEN
                      PROTEASOMES              proteasome         peptides



cell’s own cytosolic and nuclear proteins that have undergone partial degradation     Figure 24–38 A simplified drawing of
in proteasomes in the processes of normal protein turnover and quality control     antigen processing of an internal viral
mechanisms. Some of the peptide fragments produced in this way are actively     protein for presentation by class I MHC                                                                                                proteins to a cytotoxic T cell. An effector
transported into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by a specialized     cytotoxic T cell kills a virus-infected cell
transporter in the ER membrane; there, they are loaded onto newly synthesized    when it recognizes fragments of an internal
class I MHC α chains. This process depends on a peptide-loading complex that       viral protein bound to class I MHC proteins
assembles transiently in the ER membrane; the complex consists of the trans-    on the surface of the infected cell. Not all
                                                                                                          viruses enter the cell in the way that thisporter, chaperone proteins, and other proteins that assist in peptide selection                                                                                           enveloped RNA virus does, but fragments
by the class I MHC α chain and its partner β2-microglobulin. The self-peptide–      of internal viral proteins always follow the
MHC complex produced is then transported through the Golgi apparatus to the    pathway shown. Only a small proportion of
cell surface. Such complexes are not dangerous, however, because the cytotoxic     the viral proteins synthesized in the cytosol
T cells that could recognize them have been eliminated or inactivated or sup-     are degraded and transported to the cell
                                                                                                         surface, but this is sufficient to attract
pressed by regulatory T cells in the process of self-tolerance (see Figure 24–21).                                                                                     an attack by a cytotoxic T cell. Several
By contrast, in a cell infected by a pathogen such as a virus, the pathogen proteins    chaperone and other proteins in the ER
will be processed in the same way, and peptides derived from them will be dis-    lumen combine with the ABC transporter
played on the infected cell surface bound to class I MHC proteins; there, they are    and MHC protein to form a peptide-loading
recognized by effector cytotoxic T cells expressing the appropriate TCRs, thereby    complex that aids peptide selection
                                                                                                                          (editing) and the assembly of peptide–class
targeting the infected cell for destruction (Figure 24–38).                                                                    I MHC protein complexes (not shown).
   In general, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) are the main cells that express    Both the final assembly of a class I MHC
class II MHC proteins. Dendritic cells are the major APCs, as they are specialized     protein and its transport in vesicles to
for this function, and only they can activate naïve T cells. Other immune cells that     the cell surface require the presence
                                                                                                               of either a self or foreign peptide in theare targets of effector T cell regulation, including B cells and macrophages, are                                                                                                    peptide-binding groove of the MHC
also APCs and express class II MHC proteins, as do thymus epithelial cells (dis-     protein (Movie 24.10).
cussed later). Other epithelial cells can also be induced to express class II MHC
proteins and act as APCs, but only when they encounter infection or inflamma-
tion. All APCs load their newly synthesized class II MHC proteins with peptides
derived mainly from extracellular proteins that are endocytosed and delivered
to endosomes. The newly synthesized class II MHC proteins initially contain an
invariant chain, which acts as both a guide and a guardian of the peptide-binding

=== Original PDF page 1426 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1387



                                                                                                 helper T cell

                                     folded foreign
plasma                               protein antigen                                      TCR          RECOGNITION OF PEPTIDE–MHC
membrane         antigenic peptide                                                           COMPLEX BY HELPER T CELL

                                                                           dendritic or target cell                   early
CYTOSOL      endosome      ENDOCYTOSIS AND                                                       DELIVERY OF PEPTIDE–
                              DELIVERY TO ENDOSOME                                     MHC COMPLEX TO
                                                                                        PLASMA MEMBRANE
                                             fragment of
                                                     invariant chain                                 transport          FOR RECOGNITION
                 late                                                                                         vesicle            BY HELPER T CELL
            endosome

                                                                     RELEASE OF
                               LIMITED PROTEOLYSIS OF                  INVARIANT CHAIN
                            ANTIGEN AND INVARIANT               FRAGMENT AND
                            CHAIN LEAVES FRAGMENT                 BINDING OF
                          OF INVARIANT CHAIN IN                   ANTIGEN-DERIVED                                                                                                               endolysosome
                             BINDING GROOVE                          PEPTIDE
                          OF MHC PROTEIN
                                               Figure 24–39 A simplified drawing of antigen processing of a foreign extracellular
                  INVARIANT CHAIN                                                 protein for presentation by class II MHC proteins to a helper T cell. Peptide–class II MHC                    DIRECTS CLASS II
              class II   MHC PROTEIN TO            complexes are formed in endosomes and delivered via transport vesicles from endolysosomes
        MHC     LATE ENDOSOME              to the cell surface. As in the previous figure, the chaperones and other proteins that operate
            protein                                  to select (edit) peptides for high-affinity binding to the groove of class II MHC proteins are
                                    Golgi          not shown. Also not shown is how viral envelope glycoproteins can be processed by this
                                   apparatus      pathway for presentation to helper T cells: these glycoproteins are normally made in the ER and
                                                  transported via the Golgi apparatus for insertion into the plasma membrane; although most of
                                                these glycoproteins will be incorporated into the envelope of budding viral particles, some will
                                     trans Golgi      be endocytosed and enter endosomes, from where they can enter the last part of the pathway
                invariant chain     network                                                             illustrated here.



groove, preventing the groove from prematurely binding a peptide until the class
II MHC protein reaches the endocytic pathway. Here, invariant chain removal
is initiated by proteolysis and completed by the action of a chaperone protein,
allowing peptide fragments (typically 12–20 amino acids long) produced from
endocytosed proteins to bind to the groove of the class II MHC proteins. These
peptide–MHC complexes are then transported to the plasma membrane for dis-
play on the surface of the APC. In a healthy host cell, class II MHC protein grooves
are loaded with self peptides derived from normal proteins and will be ignored
by most T cells because of self-tolerance mechanisms (although they will be rec-
ognized by regulatory T cells as part of these self-tolerance mechanisms—see
Figure 24–21). During an infection, however, pathogen proteins are also endo-
cytosed and processed in the same way, enabling APCs to present pathogen
peptides bound to class II MHC proteins to T cells expressing an appropriate TCR
(Figure 24–39).
   The distinction just discussed between the antigen-processing pathways for
loading peptides onto class I and class II MHC proteins is not absolute. Dendritic
cells, for example, need to be able to activate cytotoxic T cells to kill virus-infected
cells even when the virus does not infect dendritic cells themselves. To do so, a
specialized subset of dendritic cells uses a process called cross-presentation,
which begins when these noninfected dendritic cells phagocytose virus-infected
host cells or their fragments. In one pathway, at least, the ingested viral proteins
are transported by a special mechanism from phagolysosomes into the cytosol,
where they are degraded in proteasomes; the resulting protein fragments are then
transported into the ER lumen and loaded onto assembling class I MHC proteins,
as described earlier (see Figure 24–38). Cross-presentation by dendritic cells is
not confined to endocytosed pathogens and their products: it also operates to
activate cytotoxic T cells against tumor antigens of cancer cells and the foreign
MHC proteins on the cells of foreign organ grafts.
   During an infection, only a small fraction of the many thousands of MHC pro-
teins on the surface of an APC or target cell will have pathogen peptides bound to
them. This is sufficient, however: fewer than 50 copies of the same peptide–MHC
complex on a dendritic cell, for example, can activate a helper T cell that has a

=== Original PDF page 1427 ===
1388   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



 TABLE 24–3 Properties of Human Class I and Class II MHC Proteins

                       Class I                      Class II

 Genetic loci           HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C       HLA-DM, HLA-DO, HLA-
                                                     DP, HLA-DQ, HLA-DR

 Chain structure       α chain + β2-microglobulin    α chain + β chain

  Cell distribution        Most nucleated cells            Dendritic cells, B cells,
                                                 macrophages, thymus
                                                                     epithelial cells, some others

 Presents antigen to      Cytotoxic T cells               Helper T cells, regulatory
                                              T cells

 Source of peptide       Mainly proteins made in        Mainly endocytosed plasma
 fragments             cytoplasm                membrane and extracellular
                                                           proteins

 Polymorphic domains   α1 + α2                    α1 + β1

 Recognition by       CD8                  CD4
 co-receptor


TCR that binds the complex with a high-enough affinity. Table 24–3 compares the
properties of class I and class II MHC proteins.

MHC Proteins Are the Most Polymorphic Human Proteins Known

Although any individual can make only a small number of different class I and
class II MHC proteins, together these proteins must be able to present pep-
tide fragments from almost any foreign protein to T cells. Thus, unlike the
antigen-binding site of an Ig protein, the peptide-binding groove of each MHC
protein must be able to bind a very large number of different peptides. The genes
encoding class I and class II MHC proteins (see Figure 24–37) are the most poly-
morphic known in higher vertebrates: in the human population, for example,
there are more than 2000 allelic variants of these genes. The corresponding varia-
tions in the MHC proteins are functionally important, as they are concentrated in
the floor and walls of the peptide-binding grooves and allow MHC molecules in
different individuals to bind different arrays of peptides.
     It is thought that infectious diseases have been an important driving force for
generating this remarkable MHC polymorphism. In the evolutionary war between
pathogens and the adaptive immune system, pathogens will tend to change their
proteins through mutation so that the peptides derived from them will not fit in the
MHC peptide-binding grooves. When a pathogen succeeds, it can sweep through
a population as an epidemic. In such circumstances, the few individuals who pro-
duce a new allelic form of MHC protein that can bind peptides derived from the
altered pathogen will have a large selective advantage. This type of selection will
tend to promote and maintain a large diversity of MHC proteins in the population.
In West Africa, for example, individuals with a specific MHC allele (HLA-B53) have
a reduced susceptibility to a severe form of malaria that is endemic there; although
this allele is rare elsewhere, it is found in 25% of the West African population.
   The extensive diversity of human MHC proteins is the main reason that
individuals who receive a foreign organ transplant must be treated with strong
immunosuppressive drugs to prevent the immunological rejection of the grafted
organ. Of all the foreign proteins that the graft expresses, the MHC proteins are by
far the most powerful stimulators of the recipient’s T cells, which would rapidly
destroy the graft if they were not prevented from doing so by such drugs. Foreign
MHC proteins are powerful T cell stimulants because T cells respond to them in
the same way they respond to self MHC proteins that have foreign peptides bound
to them; for this reason, the proportion of a person’s T cells that can specifically
recognize any foreign MHC protein is relatively high.

=== Original PDF page 1428 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1389

CD4 and CD8 Co-receptors on T Cells Bind to Invariant Parts               CD8 protein        class I MHC protein
of MHC Proteins

The affinity of TCRs for peptide–MHC complexes on an APC is usually too low by
itself to mediate a functional interaction between the two cells. T cells normally
                                                                                                                   TC
require accessory receptors to help stabilize the interaction by increasing the over-
all strength of the cell–cell adhesion. Unlike TCRs or MHC proteins, the accessory
receptors are invariant and do not bind to foreign peptides. Once bound to the                                    dendritic cell
surface of a dendritic cell, for example, a T cell increases the strength of the bind-                 TCR          or target cell
ing by activating an integrin adhesion protein, which then binds more strongly
to an Ig-like protein on the surface of the dendritic cell. This increased adhesion
enables the T cell to remain bound long enough to become activated.
  When an accessory receptor has a direct role in activating the T cell by gener-            TH
ating its own intracellular signals, it is called a co-receptor. The most important
and best understood of the co-receptors on T cells are the CD4 and CD8 proteins,
both of which are single-pass transmembrane proteins with extracellular Ig-like                                    dendritic cell
domains. Like TCRs, they recognize MHC proteins, but, unlike TCRs, they bind       CD4 protein              or target cell
to invariant parts of the MHC protein, far away from the peptide-binding groove.
CD4 is expressed on both helper T cells and regulatory T cells and binds to class
                                                                                                                                                class II MHC protein
II MHC proteins, whereas CD8 is expressed on cytotoxic T cells and binds to class
I MHC proteins (Figure 24–40).                                                           Figure 24–40 CD4 and CD8 co-receptors
  CD4 and CD8 contribute to T cell recognition by helping the T cell to focus on    on the surface of T cells. Cytotoxic T (TC)
                                                                                                                       cells express CD8, which recognizes class Iparticular MHC proteins, and thereby on particular types of target cells. Thus, the
                                                            MHC proteins, whereas helper T (TH) cells
recognition of class I MHC proteins by CD8 allows cytotoxic T cells to focus on    and regulatory T cells (not shown) express
any type of infected host cell, while the recognition of class II MHC proteins by    CD4, which recognizes class II MHC
CD4 allows helper and regulatory T cells to focus on the target immune cells that     proteins. Note that the co-receptors bind to
they help or suppress, respectively. The cytoplasmic tail of the CD4 and CD8 pro-     the same MHC protein that the TCR
                                                                                        has engaged, so that they are broughtteins is associated with a member of the Src family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases                                                                                                    together with TCRs during the antigen
(discussed in Chapter 15) called Lck, which phosphorylates various intracellular     recognition process. Whereas the TCR
signaling proteins on tyrosines and thereby participates in the activation of the     binds to the variable (polymorphic) parts
T cell (discussed later).                                                                                 of the MHC protein that form the peptide-
   The AIDS virus (HIV) uses CD4 molecules (as well as chemokine receptors)     binding groove, the co-receptor binds
                                                                                                          to the invariant part, well away from the
to gain entry to helper T cells (see Figure 23–18). Individuals with AIDS are sus-                                                                                                    binding groove.
ceptible to infection by microbes that are not normally dangerous because HIV
depletes helper T cells. As a result, most individuals with AIDS die of infection
within several years of the onset of symptoms, unless they are treated with a com-
bination of anti-HIV drugs. HIV also uses CD4 and chemokine receptors to enter
macrophages, which also have both of these types of receptors on their surface.

Developing Thymocytes Undergo Positive
and Negative Selection
The development of αβ T cells begins when bone marrow–derived lymphoid pro-
genitor cells enter the outer part of the thymus, the cortex, from the bloodstream.
There, the progenitor cells develop into thymus lymphocytes, thymocytes, which
undergo stepwise development under the influence of a variety of signals from
thymus epithelial cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, fibroblasts, and other
stromal cells.
   In an early step, the thymocytes are induced to express V(D)J recombinase,
which enables them to begin to rearrange their TCR gene segments and make αβ
TCRs. If the cells fail to express such a cell-surface TCR, they will not receive the
signals they need to survive and continue to develop, and they will die by apop-
tosis by default. Because peripheral αβ T cells can only see pathogen-derived
peptides in the context of self MHC proteins, developing αβ thymocytes need
to express TCRs that have some affinity for self MHC proteins to be potentially
useful; those expressing TCRs unable to bind to any self-peptide–self-MHC com-
plex would generally also fail to receive survival signals and therefore also die by
apoptosis.
   Soon after producing αβ TCRs, the developing thymocytes express both CD4
and CD8 co-receptors. These so-called double-positive thymocytes interact with

=== Original PDF page 1429 ===
1390   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



                                                        lymphoid progenitor cell



                  DIVERSIFICATION OF T CELL RECEPTORS (TCRs) ON DEVELOPING THYMOCYTES





  no TCRs       TCRs with no       TCRs with too strong    TCRs with relatively weak   TCRs with intermediate-
  expressed      recognition of      a binding afﬁnity to        recognition of self      strength recognition of
                   self class I or class II           self MHC +            class I or class II MHC +         self class II MHC +
          MHC + self peptide          self peptide                  self peptide               self peptide + IL2





  DEATH BY      DEATH BY       NEGATIVE SELECTION      POSITIVE SELECTION       POSITIVE SELECTION
  DEFAULT        DEFAULT            (signaled death)           (signaled survival)          (signaled survival)

                                                                    SURVIVAL,               SURVIVAL,
                                                             MATURATION,          MATURATION,
                                                               and MIGRATION         and MIGRATION


     apoptotic cell
                                                        TH     TH      TC      TC        Treg     Treg


                                                             naïve T cells among recirculating lymphocytes


epithelial cells in the thymus cortex that express self peptides bound to class I     Figure 24–41 Negative and positive
and class II MHC proteins. In a process called positive selection, a thymocyte     selection in the thymus. Developing
                                                                                           thymocytes with no TCRs or with TCRsexpressing a TCR that binds with an appropriate affinity to a self peptide bound                                                                                                             that have no recognition of MHC proteins
to either a class I MHC protein (using CD8 as a co-receptor) or a class II MHC     with a peptide bound would be of no use
protein (using CD4 as a co-receptor) on cortical epithelial cells is signaled to    and fail to receive survival signals and die
survive and continue to mature. As part of this process, depending on the TCR’s    by default (“from neglect”) by apoptosis.
preference for class I or class II MHC proteins, the CD4 or CD8 co-receptor that      In the process of negative selection,
                                                                                           thymocytes with TCRs with such strongwill not be needed is silenced by DNA methylation of the respective gene. The                                                                                                    binding affinity to self-peptide–self-MHC
resulting CD4 or CD8 single-positive thymocytes ultimately leave the inner part    complexes that the cells would be
of the thymus (the medulla) to become naïve T cells: the CD4 cells become either      potentially dangerous are actively signaled
helper T cells or regulatory T cells (discussed later), while the CD8 cells become     to die by apoptosis. In the process of
cytotoxic T cells.                                                                                         positive selection, thymocytes with
                                                                           TCRs with appropriate binding affinity for
   Before that, however, after the developing single-positive thymocytes move                                                                                                  self-peptide–self-MHC complexes are
from the cortex into the medulla, they undergo two more selection processes (on     signaled to survive, mature, and migrate
the surface of medullary epithelial and dendritic cells) that have crucial roles in     to peripheral lymphoid organs, where
immunological self-tolerance. Thymocytes with TCRs that bind too strongly to     they function as helper (TH), cytotoxic
self peptides bound to class I or class II MHC proteins could be dangerous if they      (TC), or regulatory T (Treg) cells, depending
                                                                                  on the class of MHC they recognize and
were to continue to mature and leave the thymus, as they could then potentially                                                                                                    the binding affinity of their TCRs: TC cells
attack similar self complexes on normal cells in peripheral tissues and thereby     recognize peptides in association with
cause an autoimmune disease. Such strong binding (via TCRs and either CD4     class I MHC proteins, whereas TH and
or CD8 co-receptors) signals such thymocytes to undergo apoptosis in a process      Treg cells recognize peptides in association
                                                                                                      with class II MHC proteins. As indicated,called negative selection, an example of clonal deletion acting in central immu-                                                                                       whereas thymocytes with TCRs that bind
nological self-tolerance (see Figure 24–21). In a second form of positive selection,     weakly to self peptides bound to self class
some CD4-positive thymocytes that bind strongly to self peptides bound to class          II MHC proteins end up as TH cells, those
II MHC proteins (but not strongly enough for negative selection to operate) in the     with TCRs that bind with intermediate
presence of secreted IL2 develop into regulatory T cells (Treg cells), which medi-     strength to self peptides bound to self
                                                                                                       class II MHC proteins (in the presence ofate clonal suppression in peripheral lymphoid tissues, an important mechanism                                                                                                                    IL2) end up as Treg cells.
in peripheral self-tolerance (see Figure 24–21). The various positive and negative
selection processes that operate during thymocyte development are summarized
in Figure 24–41.
   For negative selection in the thymus to be an effective mechanism of periph-
eral T cell self-tolerance, APCs in the thymus must display an array of self peptides
bound to self MHC molecules that reflect the self peptides derived from self pro-
teins in peripheral tissues, as well as in the thymus. The thymus, however, would

=== Original PDF page 1430 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1391


not be expected to produce many of the proteins that are specifically expressed in
other organs. As an example, it would not be expected to produce insulin, and yet
it is crucial to delete thymocytes with TCRs that could recognize insulin-derived
peptides bound to self MHC proteins on the surface of insulin-secreting β cells in
the pancreas; a failure to do so would result in the T cell–dependent destruction
of the β cells and, as a consequence, type 1 (or juvenile) diabetes.
   The mechanism that enables the deletion of such cells in the thymus depends
on a subpopulation of epithelial cells in the thymus medulla that expresses a pro-
miscuous transcriptional regulator called AIRE (autoimmune regulator), which
is specific to these epithelial cells. The AIRE protein acts as part of a multiprotein
complex to induce the production of small amounts of mRNA from 75 to 90% of
all genes, including those that encode tissue-restricted proteins such as insulin.
When the peptides derived from the proteins encoded by these genes are bound
to MHC proteins and displayed on the surface of these epithelial cells, this is suf-
ficient to ensure the deletion of most of the potentially self-reactive thymocytes.
Mutations that inactivate the AIRE gene cause a severe multi-organ autoim-
mune disease in both mice and humans, indicating the importance of AIRE in
self-tolerance.
   Having left the thymus, naïve helper and cytotoxic T cells continually receive
survival signals as a result of weak binding to self-peptide–self-MHC-protein
complexes. These naïve T cells, however, are normally only activated to proliferate
and differentiate into effector and memory T cells in a peripheral lymphoid organ
and only when their TCRs bind with high affinity to a pathogen-derived peptide
in the binding groove of an MHC protein on the surface of an activated dendritic
cell that expresses co-stimulatory signals. We now consider the functions of the
different subclasses of effector T cells, beginning with cytotoxic T cells.

Cytotoxic T Cells Induce Infected Target Cells to Undergo
Apoptosis
Cytotoxic T cells (TC cells), like the NK cells discussed earlier, protect us against
intracellular pathogens (including viruses, bacteria, and parasites) that multi-
ply in the cytoplasm of a host cell. Both types of cytotoxic cells kill infected host
cells before the pathogen can escape to infect neighboring host cells. Before a
naïve TC cell can kill, however, it has to become an effector cell by activation
on an APC, usually an activated dendritic cell that has pathogen-derived pep-
tides bound to class I MHC proteins on its surface. The effector TC cell can then
recognize any target cell harboring the same pathogen and expressing some of
the same peptide–MHC complexes on its surface: its TCRs cluster, along with CD8
co-receptors, adhesion molecules, and intracellular signaling proteins (discussed
later), at the interface between the two cells, forming an immunological synapse.
In this process, the effector TC cell reorganizes its cytoskeleton to focus its kill-
ing apparatus on the target cell, secreting its toxic proteins into a confined space
(Figure 24–42); in this way, it avoids killing neighboring cells. A similar synapse
forms when an effector helper T cell interacts with its target cell, except that the
co-receptor is CD4 (Movie 24.11).
  An effector TC cell (or an NK cell) can employ one of two strategies to kill
the target, both of which operate by inducing the target cell to activate caspases
and kill itself by undergoing apoptosis. One mechanism uses a protein called
Fas ligand on the killer-cell surface, which binds to a transmembrane receptor
protein called Fas on the target cell; this mechanism is discussed in Chapter 18
(see Figure 18–6). The other mechanism is the main one used by both NK cells
and TC cells to kill an infected target cell. The killer cell stores various toxic
proteins within secretory vesicles in its cytoplasm that it releases into the syn-
aptic space by exocytosis. The toxic proteins include perforin and proteases
called granzymes. The perforin is homologous to complement component C9
and polymerizes in the target-cell plasma membrane (see Figure 24–8), form-
ing a transmembrane pore that locally disrupts the membrane and allows the
granzymes to enter the target cell. Once in the cytosol, one of the granzymes,

=== Original PDF page 1431 ===
1392   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



                                                     TC cell           TC cell
                                                                                                                 centrosome

   target cell                                                                                                 TC cell





                                                                                                                 target cell





(A)                                                                       (B)                                               (C)
                                         5 µm                                  5 µm                                  10 µm

Figure 24–42 Effector cytotoxic T cells killing target cells in culture. (A) Electron micrograph showing an effector cytotoxic
T cell (TC cell) binding to a target cell in culture. The TC cells were obtained from mice immunized with the target cells, which
are foreign tumor cells. (B) Electron micrograph showing a TC cell and a tumor cell that the TC cell has killed. In an animal,
as opposed to in a culture dish, the killed target cell would be phagocytosed by a neighboring cell (often a macrophage)
long before it disintegrated in the way that it has here. (C) Micrograph of a TC cell and a tumor cell after immunofluorescence
staining with anti-tubulin antibodies. Note that the centrosome in the TC cell is located at the point of cell–cell contact with
the target cell—called an immunological synapse. The secretory granules (not visible) in the TC cell are initially transported
along microtubules to the centrosome, which then moves to the synapse, delivering the granules to where they can release
their contents directly onto the target-cell surface. (A and B, from D. Zagury et al., Eur. J. Immunol. 5:818–822, 1975. With
permission from John Wiley & Sons; C, © 1982 B. Geiger et al. Originally published in J. Cell Biol. https://doi.org
/10.1083/jcb.95.1.137. With permission from Rockefeller University Press.)

granzyme B, cleaves and activates executioner caspases, thereby inducing
apoptosis (Figure 24–43).

Effector Helper T Cells Help Activate Other Cells of the Innate
and Adaptive Immune Systems
In contrast to TC cells, helper T cells (TH cells) are crucial for defense against
both extracellular and intracellular pathogens, and they express CD4 rather than
                                                                                             Figure 24–43 The main way that anCD8 co-receptors and recognize foreign peptides bound to class II rather than
                                                                                                      effector TC cell (or NK cell) kills an
class I MHC proteins. Once naïve TH cells are induced on activated dendritic cells     infected target cell. This simplified drawing
to become effector cells, they can help activate other immune cells: they help    shows how the killer cell releases perforin
activate B cells to become antibody-secreting cells and later to undergo Ig class    and granzymes onto the surface of an
switching and somatic hypermutation; they help activate macrophages to destroy     infected target cell by localized exocytosis
                                                                                                               at an immunological synapse. The highany intracellular pathogens multiplying within the macrophage’s phagosomes;                                                                                                    concentration of Ca2+ in the extracellular
and they further stimulate the activated dendritic cells that activated either naïve      fluid causes the perforin to assemble into
                                                                                       transmembrane channels that disrupt the
        effector cytotoxic T cell                                                                                      target-cell plasma membrane, allowing the
                                                                                       granzymes to enter the target-cell cytosol.
                      granzyme B                                                                                                                    of the                                                                                                     granzymes,                                                                                                         granzyme                                                                                                                              B,                                                                                                    TC     One                TC         other                                                TC                                                                             TC                                                                                                   cleaves                                                                                          and                                                                                                               thereby activates                                                                                                                                executioner                        granzymes perforin                                                    assembled
molecules                                                  perforin                                    caspases (caspase-3 and caspase-7)
                         immunological                channel                 granzyme B              to initiate a caspase cascade, leading
                             synapse
                                                                                                          to apoptosis (see Figure 18–6). A single
                                                                           inactive    activated                     cytotoxic cell can kill multiple target cells
                                                                    caspase     caspase                                                                                                                             in sequence. It remains a mystery why
                                                                      caspase cascade                      the released perforins do not disrupt the
                                                                                                apoptotic    plasma membrane of the killer cell itself
         infected target cell                                                                        target cell    (Movie 24.12 and Movie 24.13).

=== Original PDF page 1432 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1393


TC cells or naïve TH cells—to maintain or increase the dendritic cells’ activated
state. In each case, the effector TH cell recognizes the same complex of foreign
peptide and class II MHC protein on the target-cell surface that it initially rec-
ognized on the activated dendritic cell. As discussed later, the TH cell stimulates
the target cell both by secreting a variety of cytokines (mainly interleukins) and
by displaying co-stimulatory proteins on the TH cell surface. As we discuss now,
different subtypes of TH effector cells have different functions.

Naïve Helper T Cells Can Differentiate into Different Types
of Effector T Cells
In response to infection, a naïve TH cell can differentiate into several distinct types
of effector T cells, depending on the nature of the pathogen and on the cytokines the
TH cell encounters while being activated, which mainly depends on the activating
dendritic cell. These different effector T cell types include four subtypes of helper
T cells—TFH, TH1, TH2, and TH17 cells—and regulatory T cells (Treg cells). Initially,
the naïve TH cells differentiate into two subpopulations of helper T cells: follicu-
lar helper T cells (TFH cells), which support B cell antibody production in lymphoid     Figure 24–44 Differentiation of naïve
                                                                                              helper T cells into different types of
follicles (see Figure 24–20) in peripheral lymphoid organs, and non-TFH helper                                                                                                     effector helper cells or regulatory T cells
T cells that will develop into TH1, TH2, or TH17 effector TH cells; most of the latter      in a peripheral lymphoid organ. The
three cell types migrate from the peripheral lymphoid organ where they differenti-     nature of the pathogen and the cytokines
ated to the site of infection, where they help innate immune cells fight the pathogen.    produced by the activating dendritic cell
   Figure 24–44 summarizes both the cytokines that help induce these different     (and by other innate immune cells in the
                                                                                                  environment) mainly determine which type
effector T cells and some of the cytokines the effector cells then secrete, as well                                                                                                               of effector T cell develops, as indicated.
as the main transcription regulators that control the development of the effector    Some of the main cytokines produced by
cells. Naïve TH cells activated in the presence of interleukin-6 (IL6) develop into    each type of effector cell are also shown,
effector TFH cells, which are located in lymphoid follicles, where they secrete a    and the master transcription regulator for
variety of cytokines, including IL21, to help specific B cells to proliferate and differ-    each subset is indicated in the nucleus.
                                                                       Some of the differentiated effector cells are
entiate into antibody-secreting effector cells and undergo somatic hypermutation                                                                                                                       “plastic,” in that they are able to change
and Ig class switching within germinal centers (see Figure 24–20). Naïve TH cells     the cytokines they produce in response to
activated by dendritic cells secreting IL12 develop into effector TH1 cells, which    changes in their environment (not shown).


                                              TYPE OF EFFECTOR     MAIN CYTOKINES        SOME MAJOR
                                                      T CELL            PRODUCED             FUNCTIONS


             naïve helper                                      Bcl6                      IL21             helps B cells proliferate,
              T cell                               IL6                                                     differentiate into effector
                                                                                                                                      cells, and undergo somatic
                                                              TFH cell                                  hypermutation and
                TH       DIFFERENTIATION                                                                      Ig class switching

                                                               T-bet                   IFNγ              activates a macrophage
                    CD4                                                                          to kill pathogens
co-receptor                                      IL12 +                                                                                  it harbors
  protein              TCR                   IFNγ
                                                      TH1 cell
                              class IIco-stimulatory
                MHC protein   protein                                                                                                     helps various immune cells
                                                      Gata3                  IL4, IL5, IL13        respond to extracellular
                                                      IL4                                            pathogens, including parasites
                          INDUCING
                                                      TH2 cell
                         CYTOKINES
                                                                                              enhances neutrophil
                                                                                               production and recruitment
                                                                                              IL17, IL22          in response to extracellular                                                             Rorγt                                  pathogens; enhances
       activated dendritic cell                  TGFβ,                                                  antimicrobial function of
                                                     IL6 +                                                                                                                barrier epithelial cells
                                                  IL23      TH17 cell

                                                      FoxP3                TGFβ, IL10           suppresses responses
                                                                                                         of other T cell
                                       TGFβ +                                                  subpopulations
                                                      IL2
                                                       induced
                                                           regulatory
                                                      T cell

=== Original PDF page 1433 ===
1394   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


produce interferon-g (IFNg) to help activate macrophages to destroy pathogens
that either invaded the macrophage or were ingested by it; the IFNγ can also help
activate naïve cytotoxic T cells in a peripheral lymphoid organ to become effec-
tor TC cells. Naïve TH cells activated in the presence of IL4 develop into effector
TH2 cells, which secrete IL4, IL5, and IL13 to help fight extracellular pathogens,
including parasites; they stimulate B cells to switch from making IgM and IgD to
making IgE antibodies, which can bind to mast cells and basophils, as discussed
earlier. Naïve TH cells activated in the presence of IL6, IL23, and TGFb develop
into effector TH17 cells; these cells secrete IL17 and IL22 to promote production
and recruitment of neutrophils and to stimulate barrier epithelial cells to secrete
cytokines and antimicrobial peptides.
   In some cases, naïve TH cells that encounter their antigen in a peripheral
lymphoid organ in the presence of TGFβ and in the absence of IL6 develop into
regulatory T cells (Treg), which suppress rather than help immune cells. They
are called induced Treg cells to distinguish them from natural Treg cells, which
develop in the thymus by positive selection during thymocyte development (see
Figure 24–41). Both types of Treg cells suppress the activation or function of vari-
ous other kinds of innate and adaptive immune cells, by means of both secreted
suppressive cytokines such as IL10 and TGFβ and inhibitory proteins on the Treg
cell surface. Induced Treg cells are mainly concerned with suppressing immune
responses to foreign antigens (preventing responses to harmless ingested or
inhaled antigens and commensal microbes, as well as limiting responses against
pathogens to avoid excessive reactions that cause unwanted tissue injury); natural
Treg cells are concerned with preventing immune responses to self molecules (see
Figure 24–21). Both induced and natural Treg cells express the transcription regu-
lator FoxP3, which serves as both a marker of these cells and a master controller
of their development: if the gene encoding this protein is inactivated in mice or
humans, the individuals fail to produce any Treg cells and develop a fatal auto-
immune disease involving multiple organs—findings that establish the crucial
importance of Treg cells in self-tolerance.

Both T and B Cells Require Multiple Extracellular Signals
for Activation

Foreign antigen binding to BCRs or TCRs initiates the process whereby the B or
T cells are stimulated to proliferate and differentiate into effector and memory
cells. As mentioned earlier, these antigen receptors do not act on their own: they
are stably associated with invariant transmembrane polypeptide chains that are
required to relay the signal into the cell. In B cells, these are called Iga and Igb
(Figure 24–45A), while in T cells they exist in a complex called CD3, composed
of four types of polypeptide chains (Figure 24–45B). In both cases, the associated


                      BCR



                                                          TCR




                                                            ε   γ              δ    ε                  β  α      α  β
                                 EXTRACELLULAR
                                      SPACE                                                Figure 24–45 The invariant chains
                                                                                         associated with BCRs and TCRs.
                                                                                                                         (A) Each BCR is associated with two        CYTOSOL
                                                                                                                  invariant heterodimers, each composed
                                                                                                              of an Igα and an Igβ polypeptide chain
                   Igα–Igβ heterodimers                              ζ    ζ                                linked by a disulfide bond (red). (B) Each
                                                                      TCR is associated with an invariant CD3
                                                                                      complex composed of two disulfide-
                                                   CD3 complex                     bonded ζ chains, two ε chains, and one
                                                                                          δ and one γ chain; these chains form
          (A)          B CELL                         (B)           T CELL                         homodimers or heterodimers, as shown.

=== Original PDF page 1434 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1395



                              identical antigenic      BCR                            determinants




                                         invariant chains

    β α    α β         β α    α β   plasma membrane   β α    α β         β α    α β   EXTRACELLULAR
                                               of B cell                                                SPACE

                                                                                      CYTOSOL

                                                         P        P          P        P
                    active Src-like kinase                    P        P                 P        P

                                                                           active Syk kinase relays
   inactive Syk kinase                                                      signal downstream


Figure 24–46 Early signaling events in a B cell activated by the binding of specific foreign antigen to its BCRs. If the
antigen is on the surface of a pathogen or is a soluble macromolecule with two or more identical antigenic determinants (as
shown), it cross-links adjacent BCRs, causing them and their associated invariant chains to cluster, as shown. A Src-like
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (which can be either Fyn or Lyn) is associated with the cytosolic tail of Igβ; it joins the cluster and
phosphorylates both the Igα and Igβ invariant chains (for simplicity, only the phosphorylation on Igβ is shown). An important
transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase called CD45 is also required to remove inactivating phosphates from these Src-
like kinases for the signaling process to occur (not shown). The resulting phosphotyrosines on Igα and Igβ serve as docking sites
for another Src-like tyrosine kinase called Syk, which becomes phosphorylated and thereby activated to relay the signal onward.
  The pathway from TCRs is similar (including a requirement for CD45), except that the first Src-like kinase is Lck (instead
of Fyn or Lyn), and it is associated with a CD4 or CD8 co-receptor and phosphorylates tyrosines on all the CD3 polypeptide
chains shown in Figure 24–45B; the second Src-like kinase is ZAP70, which is homologous to the Syk kinase in B cells
(Movie 24.14).


proteins help convert extracellular antigen binding to the BCR or TCR into
intracellular signals, and they do so in similar ways.
   Antigen binding to BCRs or TCRs clusters these receptors and their associated
invariant chains (and CD4 or CD8 co-receptors in the case of TCRs). This clus-
tering activates a Src family cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (discussed in Chapter
15) to phosphorylate tyrosines on the cytoplasmic tails of some of the invariant
chains. The phosphotyrosines then serve as docking sites for a second cytoplas-
mic tyrosine kinase, which becomes phosphorylated and activated by the first
kinase; the second kinase then relays the signal downstream by phosphorylating
other intracellular signaling proteins on tyrosines. Some of these early events in
the signaling pathway activated by BCRs are shown in Figure 24–46.
   Signaling through BCRs or TCRs and their associated proteins alone is not
sufficient to activate a lymphocyte to proliferate and differentiate. Extracellular
co-stimulatory signals produced by another cell are also required, and they are
provided by both membrane-bound proteins (see Figure 24–34) and secreted cyto-
kines. Indeed, signaling through the BCR or TCR with insufficient co-stimulation
can either eliminate the lymphocyte (clonal deletion) or inactivate it, with both of
these mechanisms contributing to peripheral self-tolerance (see Figure 24–21). For
a naïve T cell, an activated dendritic cell provides the co-stimulatory signals; these
include the transmembrane B7 proteins, which are recognized by the co-receptor
protein CD28 on the surface of the T cell (Figure 24–47A). For a B cell, an effector TFH
cell provides the co-stimulatory signals; these include the transmembrane CD40
ligand, which binds to CD40 receptors on the B cell (Figure 24–47B). The
CD40 ligand on effector TH cells acts in two other situations: (1) it acts back on
CD40 receptors on the dendritic cell surface to increase and sustain the activation
of the dendritic cell, creating a positive feedback loop; and (2) it acts as a co-
stimulatory signal on the surface of an effector TH1 cell, allowing the T cell to help
activate an infected macrophage to destroy the pathogens it harbors.
   In addition to receptors for co-stimulatory proteins, both B and T cells have
inhibitory proteins on their surface that negatively regulate the cell’s activity,
preventing excessive or inappropriate responses. Two such proteins, CTLA4 and
PD1, expressed by T cells have attracted great attention because of their roles in
suppressing the ability of T cells to inhibit cancer progression. They inhibit T cell
activity in different ways: CTLA4 inhibits T cell activation by competing with the

=== Original PDF page 1435 ===
1396   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems


                                                                                             Figure 24–47 Comparison of the co-  (A) DENDRITIC CELL ACTIVATES HELPER T CELL    (B) HELPER T CELL ACTIVATES B CELL
                                                                                                stimulatory proteins required to activate
                                                                                 a helper T cell and a B cell in response                                             B cell antigenic     latent T cell antigenic
                                                   determinant       determinant (peptide)        to the same foreign protein. (A) A naïve
                                                                                                      helper T cell (TH) is activated by a peptide
                                              BCR              folded foreign              fragment of a foreign protein bound to a
                       TH                                                protein antigen               class II MHC protein on the surface of an
                                                                                                        activated dendritic cell. The co-stimulatory   NAÏVE
   HELPER                                           B                                         protein on the dendritic cell (a B7 protein—
   T CELL        CD28   TCR                                       B CELL                    either CD80 or CD86) binds to the CD28
                                                                                                  co-receptor on the TH cell, providing a
                                         foreign
                                                                                             necessary co-stimulatory signal to the TH     cytokines                          peptide
                                                                                                                                     cell; in addition, cytokines secreted by the
                                              CD40                                            dendritic cell (and by other nearby innate
                B7                           cytokines                      T cell antigenic       immune cells) influence what subtype of                                             CD40                                              class II                                                                           determinant            effector helper cell the TH cell becomes                                                        ligand
                         MHC                                        (foreign peptide)       (see Figure 24–44). (B) Once activated to                                      protein
                                                                             become an effector cell, the TH cell—most
                                                                                commonly a follicular TH cell (TFH; see                                                                        TFH
                                                                                                       Figure 24–44)—can help activate B cells
                                                                                                             that have the same peptide–MHC protein
                                                                                       complexes on their surface as the dendritic
                                                                                                                                cell that activated the naïve TH cell. These
                                                                   B cells have BCRs that bind an antigenic
          ACTIVATED DENDRITIC CELL              EFFECTOR HELPER T CELL                       determinant on the surface of a folded
                                                                                                            foreign protein, and the B cells endocytose
                                                                                                    the protein (red arrow); the protein is
transmembrane co-receptor protein CD28 (see Figure 24–47A), whereas PD1 is     then cleaved into peptides, some of
expressed on activated T cells, and its prolonged binding to its cell-surface ligand    which are carried to the B cell surface by
                                                                                                       class II MHC proteins. There, some of the(PDL1 or PDL2) on various cell types, including cancer cells, inhibits the activity                                                                                   peptide–MHC complexes are recognized
of the T cells. Monoclonal antibodies against either CTLA4 or PD1 (or PDL1), or    by the TCRs on the TFH cell (see Figure
especially against both of these inhibitory pathways, can relieve the inhibition and     24–39). Note that the BCRs and TCRs
allow TC cells to destroy the tumor cells in many patients with metastatic cancer     recognize different antigenic determinants
(see Figure 20–46).                                                                                      of the protein. As indicated, the co-
                                                                                                          stimulatory protein used by the effector
                                                                                           TFH cell is CD40 ligand, which binds to the
Many Cell-Surface Proteins Belong to the Ig Superfamily              CD40 co-receptor on the B cell; the TFH
                                                                                                                                cell also secretes cytokines (green arrow)
Most of the proteins that mediate antigen recognition and cell–cell recognition     including IL21 (see Figure 24–44) to help
in the adaptive immune system contain one or more Ig or Ig-like domains, sug-     stimulate the B cell to undergo somatic
gesting that the proteins have a common evolutionary history. Included in this     hypermutation and class switching (not
                                                                                             shown). The CD4 co-receptor on TH cellsvery large Ig superfamily are antibodies, TCRs, MHC proteins, the CD4, CD8,                                                                                   and the invariant chains associated with the
and CD28 co-receptors, the B7 co-stimulatory proteins, and most of the invariant    TCRs and BCRs are omitted in both A and
polypeptide chains associated with TCRs and BCRs, as well as the various Fc   B for simplicity.
receptors on lymphocytes and other leukocytes. Many of these proteins are
dimers or higher oligomers, in which Ig or Ig-like domains of one chain interact
with those in another (Figure 24–48).
   In both vertebrates and invertebrates, many proteins in the Ig superfamily are
also found outside immune systems, where they often function in cell–cell rec-
ognition and adhesion processes, both during development and in adult tissues.
It seems likely that the entire gene superfamily evolved from a primordial gene
coding for a single Ig-like domain, similar to that encoding β2-microglobulin
(see Figure 24–36). In present-day family members, a separate exon usually
encodes the amino acids in each Ig-like domain, consistent with the likelihood
that new family members arose during evolution by exon and gene duplications.

Vaccination Against Pathogens Has Been Immunology’s Greatest
Contribution to Human Health

As all organisms do, we continually battle with our pathogens. Despite the sophis-
tication of our immune defenses described in this chapter, this battle has been
remarkably evenly matched. As discussed in Chapter 23, all pathogens have devel-
oped multiple ways of overcoming their host’s defenses, at least for long enough
to replicate and establish an infection. Most pathogens have the important advan-
tage of multiplying and evolving much more rapidly than humans; in particular,
viruses, as a collection, have evolved mechanisms for blocking essentially every

=== Original PDF page 1436 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1397


                                                                                             Figure 24–48 Some of the cell-surface
                                                                                                proteins discussed in this chapter that
                          = disulﬁde bond
                                                                                     belong to the Ig superfamily. The Ig
                                                                                   and Ig-like domains are shaded in gray,
plasma
                                                                                             except for the antigen-binding Ig and Ig-likemembrane
                                                                                      domains of BCRs and TCRs, respectively,
                                                                                         which are shaded in blue. Note that the
                                                                                                     antigen-binding domains of class I and
                                                                                                       class II MHC proteins (also shaded in
                                                                    EXTRACELLULAR     blue) are not Ig-like. The Ig superfamily
                                                                               SPACE     also includes many cell-surface proteins
                                                                                                       involved in cell–cell interactions outside
                                                                                                    the immune system, such as the neural
                                                                       CYTOSOL      cell adhesion molecules (NCAMs; see
                                                                                                       Figure 19–29) and the receptors for
   Fc receptor      class I MHC       class II MHC         TCR            BCR                         various protein growth factors discussed                    protein          protein
                                                    generated by gene-segment                         in Chapter 15 (not shown). There are more
                                                         rearrangement                         than 750 members of the Ig superfamily
                                                                                                                             in humans, making it the most populous
                                                                                                               family of proteins encoded in the human
                                                                                   genome.





                            ε    γ  δ     ε     CD4       CD8       CD28        B7     Igα       Igβ
                      CD3 complex

step of our innate and adaptive immune responses. In response, humans have
developed public health measures and powerful antipathogen drugs and vaccines
that reinforce our natural immunological defenses.
   The modern era of vaccination began in 1796, when Edward Jenner reported
that material from skin lesions in cattle suffering from cowpox protects humans
against smallpox, which at that time was a devastating epidemic disease. Although
the cowpox virus is closely related to the smallpox virus, it does not cause dis-
ease in humans. Smallpox was officially eradicated worldwide by 1980 through
widespread and coordinated vaccination with intact vaccinia virus (a relative of
the cowpox virus), after the disease had killed roughly 500 million people in the
preceding 100 years. Today, vaccination (from the Latin word vaccus, meaning
“cow”) is widely used to control the spread of many different pathogens, saving
millions of human lives a year worldwide. In the best cases, a vaccine induces
strong, long-lasting, adaptive immunological memory, mimicking and often
bettering the protection induced by the natural infection, but without causing
disease; that is, it is strongly immunogenic but not pathogenic.
   There are currently three classes of vaccines approved for use against different
pathogens in humans (Table 24–4). In the first class are whole microbe vaccines.
These are generally strongly immunogenic but require specific manipulations
to avoid pathogenicity. A common method is attenuation, in which the patho-
gen is passaged repeatedly through either a foreign host or cultured foreign cells
until it accumulates mutations that render it no longer pathogenic in humans. To
eliminate the risk of a genetic reversion to a pathogenic form, some vaccines of
this class consist of either extracts of the pathogen or whole pathogens that have
been inactivated by heating, chemical treatment, or, now commonly, by genetic
manipulation.
   The second class, subunit vaccines, are even safer, consisting of one or more
individual components of the pathogen—either purified from the pathogen
or, more commonly, produced by recombinant DNA technology. Most subunit
vaccines are composed of viral proteins: common examples consist of viral coat
proteins self-assembled in vitro to form virus-like particles. Other subunit vac-
cines are composed of bacterial macromolecules: examples are inactivated forms

=== Original PDF page 1437 ===
1398   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



 TABLE 24–4 Some Vaccines Approved for Human Use

 Class of vaccine                                          Diseases (pathogens)*

                                    Whole microbe (or microbial extract)

 Attenuated bacteria                                             Tuberculosis (BCG, attenuated bovine Mycobacterium
                                                                       tuberculosis), typhoid fever (Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi,
                                                                         oral vaccine)

  Killed bacteria                                                   Pertussis (whooping cough; Bordetella pertussis), cholera
                                                                            (Vibrio cholerae)

 Bacterial extract                                             Cholera (Vibrio cholerae)

 Attenuated virus                                             Measles, mumps, rubella (German measles), varicella
                                                                (chickenpox, shingles), influenza, rotavirus, polio (oral vaccine),
                                                                        hepatitis A and B

 Inactivated virus                                               Rabies, influenza, polio, hepatitis A and B

                                                      Subunit

 Bacterial capsular polysaccharide                                Meningitis (Neisseria meningitidis), typhoid fever (Salmonella
                                                                    enterica serovar Typhi), bacterial pneumonia (Streptococcus
                                                         pneumoniae)

 Bacterial polysaccharide–protein conjugate                       Meningitis (Haemophilus influenzae), bacterial pneumonia
                                                              (Streptococcus pneumoniae)

 Bacterial protein toxids                                       Tetanus (Clostridium tetani), diphtheria (Corynebacterium
                                                                       diphtheriae), pertussis (toxoid + other bacterial proteins)

  Viral protein (usually recombinant)                                 Hepatitis A and B, human influenza viruses

  Virus-like particles composed of viral coat proteins                Cervical cancer (human papillomavirus types 16 and 18)

                                                     Nucleic acid**

 Recombinant RNA virus vector, based on vesicular stomatitis     Ebola hemorrhagic fever (Ebola virus)
  virus, engineered to express an Ebola virus surface protein***

 Recombinant DNA virus vector, based on adenovirus,          COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus)
 engineered to express a form of SARS-CoV-2 spike
 protein (see Figure 24–50)****

 Lipid nanoparticles containing modified mRNA that encodes a   COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus)
 form of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (see Figure 24–50)****

 *There are often different types of vaccines available for the same disease.
 **Some (such as the Ebola vaccine) can replicate in recipient cells, others (including those shown in Figure 24–50) cannot.
  ***This was the first nucleic acid vaccine approved (in 2019) for human use.
  ****These vaccines were given Emergency Use Authorization at the end of 2020 or in 2021 and were approved in 2021.




of secreted protein toxins (toxoids), which in their active forms cause diseases
such as tetanus and diphtheria, and the capsular polysaccharides that surround
various bacteria (see Table 24–4).
   To be maximally effective, a vaccine needs to stimulate both B cell and T cell
immune responses. Subunit vaccines composed solely of bacterial capsular
polysaccharides, for example, are relatively ineffective because they only activate
B cells. Because helper T cells are required to induce B cell memory, antibody
affinity maturation, and Ig class switching, such polysaccharide vaccines only
induce short-lived, low-affinity, IgM anti-polysaccharide antibodies, providing
weak and brief protection. Chemically coupling (conjugating) the polysaccharide
to a protein such as tetanus or diphtheria toxoid to produce a conjugate vaccine
solves this problem: the protein component provides the foreign peptides that

=== Original PDF page 1438 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1399


                                                                                             Figure 24–49 How conjugate vaccines                                          bacterial polysaccharide  conjugate                                                                                             against bacterial polysaccharide
                                               toxoid protein  vaccine                                                                                           antigens activate both B cells
                                                                              and helper T cells. In this case, the
                                                                                                  polysaccharide is chemically coupled to
                                                    endolysosome                           a protein toxoid. The B cells recognize
                            B cell                                                              the polysaccharide part of the conjugate,
                                                                                          endocytose the conjugate, and cleave
                                                          toxoid peptides                              the protein part into peptide fragments in
                                                                                          endolysosomes. The peptide fragments
                                                                                                     are then transported by class II MHC
                                                                                                         proteins to the B cell surface, where the
                                                              class II MHC protein                           peptide–MHC complexes are recognized                         CD40                                                    (with toxoid peptide bound)                     by helper T cells (see Figure 24–39). The                     cytokines
                        CD40                                                                    helper T cells (TFH cells) help activate
                                           T cell receptor (TCR)                              ligand                                                                  the B cells to produce both high-affinity
                                                                                         IgG anti-polysaccharide antibodies (see
                                                                                                       Figure 24–47B) and memory B cells
                                          TFH cell                                                            (not shown).




activate the helper T cells required for optimal stimulation of the appropriate
polysaccharide-specific B cells, as illustrated in Figure 24–49.
   As discussed earlier in the chapter, for a vaccine to activate adaptive immune
responses, it first must activate dendritic cells. A vaccine composed of a whole
microbe or a microbial extract fulfills this requirement because  it contains
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that activate pattern recogni-
tion receptors (PRRs) on innate immune cells, especially dendritic cells. Subunit
vaccines that lack PAMPs require the addition of an adjuvant, a substance that
enhances the immunogenicity of antigens, usually by activating PRRs.
   The third and most recent type of vaccines contains genetically engineered
DNA or RNA molecules that encode pathogen proteins or parts of such proteins.
The development of these nucleic acid vaccines has required the knowledge and
tools produced by decades of fundamental research to make the vaccines tolerable,
safe, and effective. The first such vaccine approved for human use (in 2019) was a
recombinant RNA virus vector vaccine encoding an Ebola virus surface protein (see
Table 24–4). But the use of nucleic acid vaccines only took off in 2021, in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic, which has infected hundreds of millions of people and
caused millions of deaths. Because only a pathogen’s genome sequence is needed
to develop a nucleic acid vaccine against the pathogen, it was possible to produce
the first safe and effective DNA- and RNA-based vaccines for large-scale human use
within a year from the publication (in January 2020) of the RNA genome sequence
of the causative SARS-CoV-2 virus.
   Figure 24–50 illustrates how two different kinds of nucleic acid vaccines against
COVID-19 work: both encode forms of the protein “spike” found on the surface
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (see Figure 1–49). A number of whole microbe and sub-
unit vaccines are also in wide use or in development around the world to fight the
COVID-19 pandemic. But, given the recent success of nucleic acid vaccines, it seems
likely that they will revolutionize how most new vaccines are produced in the future.
  A successful vaccination program against a pathogen usually requires that
most of the population becomes immune to it, either naturally by infection or by
vaccination. Such herd immunity slows the spread of an infection by decreasing
the number of susceptible individuals in the population. To produce herd immu-
nity, a vaccine needs to be well tolerated, safe and effective, and widely perceived
to be so. The importance of both herd immunity and the public acceptance of
a vaccine was inadvertently demonstrated by the response to a false and fraud-
ulent report of a link between a measles vaccine and autism. After publication
of the report in 1998, the uptake of the vaccine in Britain decreased substan-
tially, leading to an increase in both the size and frequency of measles outbreaks
(Figure 24–51).

=== Original PDF page 1439 ===
1400   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems



                  DNA virus vector vaccine                       mRNA lipid nanoparticle vaccine

                        adenovirus        DNA sequence encoding
                 DNA                a form of SARS-CoV-2     modiﬁed mRNA encoding
                                                 spike protein              a form of SARS-CoV-2                 lipid
                                                                                   spike protein                                                                                                                nanoparticle

                           replication-             NUCLEUS   mRNA encoding a
                        deﬁcient                           form of SARS-CoV-2
                        adenovirus                                 spike protein
                         vector
                                                                          ribosomes


                                                         TRANSLATION AND GLYCOSYLATION
                                TRANSCRIPTION AND
                           RNA PROCESSING                              ER AND GOLGI
                                                            transport
                                                                    vesicle            trimeric
                                                                               spike protein


                                 RECIPIENT CELL



                                           IMMUNE RESPONSE IN
                                                LOCAL LYMPH NODES

Figure 24–50 How two kinds of widely used nucleic acid COVID-19 vaccines work. In both, the nucleic acids encode forms of the spike (S)
protein, which normally protrudes from the surface of the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus (see Figure 1–49 and Figure 9–50); these spikes on the virus
bind to receptors on various human cells and help the virus enter the cells. The DNA virus vector vaccine shown on the left is representative of two
COVID-19 vaccines that received early authorization for emergency use in humans—known as the Oxford–AstraZeneca vaccine and the Janssen–
Johnson & Johnson vaccine—both of which are based on adenovirus vectors (chimpanzee and human, respectively). These vectors, which have
been genetically engineered to prevent their replication in human cells, transfer their DNA into the nucleus of these cells, where it produces mRNAs.
As indicated, the vector-encoded mRNAs move to the cytoplasm, where they are translated on endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-bound ribosomes to
produce the spike proteins. After glycosylation in the ER and Golgi apparatus, the spike proteins are transported to the cell surface as trimeric spikes.
  The mRNA lipid nanoparticle vaccine shown on the right is representative of the first COVID-19 vaccines of this kind authorized for emergency
use in humans—known as the Pfizer–BioNTech and the Moderna vaccines. The mRNA is synthesized in vitro with nucleoside modifications (uridines
replaced by methylpseudouridines) to prevent the mRNA from binding to PRRs and triggering a destructive inflammatory response, which would
otherwise decrease the vaccine’s tolerability and the mRNA’s translation. In addition, the mRNA is designed with a nucleotide sequence that
maximizes its translation efficiency. Finally, the mRNA molecules are encapsulated in tiny, complex lipid nanoparticles: this coating protects the
mRNAs, enhances the vaccine’s uptake into host-cell endosomes, and mediates the release of the mRNA from the endosomes into the cytosol.
   In all cases the vaccine is injected into an arm muscle, from where it is carried via lymphatic vessels to local lymph nodes. Both in the muscle
and in lymph nodes, antigen-presenting cells (most important, dendritic cells) take up the vaccine and are activated in the process. In these cells,
the mRNAs are translated into spike protein, which is then glycosylated and transported to the cell surface as indicated. In the lymph nodes, the
activated dendritic cells present peptide fragments of the spike protein, bound to MHC proteins on the dendritic-cell surface, to spike-specific helper
and cytotoxic T cells, which are thereby activated to proliferate and differentiate into effector cells. The effective helper T cells then help stimulate
spike-specific B cells to proliferate and differentiate into effector cells that secrete neutralizing anti-spike antibodies, while the cytotoxic T cells kill any
host cells that subsequently become infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. At the same time, the activated dendritic cells stimulate the production of
spike-specific memory B and T cells, which a second immunization can further increase in number and effectiveness. Later, a natural encounter with
the SARS-CoV-2 virus will call these memory cells into action to protect vaccinated individuals against COVID-19 disease.
     It remains to be seen how long the protection lasts and how effective it will be against new mutant SARS-CoV-2 virus variants, as they arise and
are selected to resist our collective adaptive immune responses to either immunization or natural infection. Fortunately, the nucleic acid vaccines,
especially mRNA vaccines, can be resynthesized rapidly to increase their effectiveness against any such genetic variants.

Summary
There are three main functionally distinct classes of T cells. Cytotoxic T cells (TC cells)
directly kill infected host cells by the targeted secretion of perforins and granzymes
onto the surface of the infected cells, inducing them to kill themselves by undergoing
apoptosis. Helper T cells (TH cells) help B cells to make antibody responses, macro-
phages to destroy the microorganisms they harbor, and dendritic cells to activate
TC cells. By contrast, regulatory T cells (Treg cells) produce suppressive proteins
(such as the cytokines IL10 and TGFb) to inhibit other immune cells.
    All T cells express cell-surface antigen receptors (TCRs), which are encoded by
genes that are assembled from multiple gene segments during T cell development
in the thymus. ab TCRs recognize peptide fragments of foreign proteins that are
displayed in association with MHC proteins on the surface of antigen-presenting
cells (APCs), including T cell targets. Naïve T cells are activated in peripheral

=== Original PDF page 1440 ===
T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                                                               1401


                                                                              100            Figure 24–51 The importance of herd
                                                                                     immunity and public acceptance of a        80
                                                                              95             vaccine. After the publication in 1998 of
        60                                                                              a false link between measles vaccination        size                                                                                   and autism, fewer children in Britain were                                                                              90      uptake
        40                                                                                       vaccinated against the measles virus
                                                                                                            (red line), and outbreaks of measles (blue
                                                                              85               outbreak  20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            vaccine          bars) increased in both frequency and
                                                                                                                     size. About 95% of a population needs
                                                                              80               to be immune to measles to achieve             1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002
                                                                                             herd immunity (the comparable value for                                              year
                                                                                 COVID-19 is estimated to be between
lymphoid organs by activated dendritic cells, which secrete cytokines and express    65 and 90%, depending on the virus
                                                                                                                         variant). The vaccine uptake shown ispeptide–MHC complexes, co-stimulatory proteins, and various cell–cell adhesion                                                                                                    the percentage of children completing a
molecules on their surface.                                                                    primary course of the measles, mumps,
   Class I MHC proteins present foreign peptides to TC cells, whereas class II    and rubella (MMR) vaccine at their second
MHC proteins present foreign peptides to TH cells and self and foreign peptides      birthday. (Data courtesy of V.A.A. Jansen
to Treg cells. Whereas class I MHC proteins are expressed on almost all nucleated    and M.E. Ramsey. Adapted from V.A.A.
                                                                                       Jansen et al., Science 301:804, 2003. With
vertebrate cells, class II MHC proteins are normally restricted to APCs, including                                                                                                 permission from AAAS.)
dendritic cells, macrophages, and B lymphocytes. Both classes of MHC proteins
have a single peptide-binding groove, which binds a large set of small peptide frag-
ments produced intracellularly by normal protein-degradation processes: class I
MHC proteins mainly bind fragments produced in the cytosol, whereas class II
MHC proteins mainly bind fragments produced in endocytic compartments. The
peptide–MHC complexes are transported to the cell surface, where complexes
that contain a peptide derived from a foreign protein are recognized by TCRs,
which interact with both the peptide and the walls of the peptide-binding groove.
T cells also express CD4 or CD8 co-receptors, which recognize invariant regions of
MHC proteins: TH cells and Treg cells express CD4, which recognizes class II MHC
proteins; TC cells express CD8, which recognizes class I MHC proteins.
  A combination of positive and negative selection processes operate during thy-
mocyte development to help ensure that only T cells with potentially useful TCRs
survive, mature, and emigrate from the thymus, while all other thymocytes die by
apoptosis. After leaving the thymus, the naïve TH and TC cells continually receive
survival signals when their TCRs recognize self-peptide–self-MHC complexes, but
they can only be activated to become effector cells when their TCRs encounter
foreign peptides in the grooves of MHC proteins on an activated dendritic cell. The
cells that leave the thymus as natural Treg cells help maintain self-tolerance by sup-
pressing self-reactive T cells that escape negative selection in the thymus.
   The production of an effector T cell from a naïve T cell requires multiple signals
from an activated dendritic cell. MHC–peptide complexes on the dendritic cell sur-
face provide one signal, by binding to both TCRs and to either a CD4 co-receptor on
a TH or Treg cell or to a CD8 co-receptor on a TC cell; co-stimulatory proteins on the
dendritic cell surface and secreted cytokines provide the other signals. When naïve
TH cells are initially activated on a dendritic cell in a peripheral lymphoid organ,
they can differentiate into various types of effector T cells, depending on the invading
pathogen and the cytokines in their environment. They can become effector TFH cells,
which remain in the lymphoid organ to support B cell antibody production in lymph
follicles, or they can develop into effector TH1, TH2, or TH17 cells, which mainly
migrate to sites of infection, where they help other immune cells fight the pathogen;
alternatively, they can develop into induced Treg cells, which suppress other immune
cells. The various effector TH cells recognize the same complex of foreign peptide and
class II MHC protein on the surface of the target cell they are helping as they initially
recognized on the dendritic cell that activated them; they activate their target cells by
a combination of membrane-bound co-stimulatory proteins and secreted cytokines.
Treg cells use cell-surface and secreted inhibitory proteins to suppress their target cells.
   Both T cells and B cells require multiple signals for activation. Antigen binding
to the TCRs or BCRs provides one signal, while co-stimulatory proteins binding to
co-receptors and cytokines binding to their complementary cell-surface receptors
provide the others. Effector TH cells provide the co-stimulatory signals and secreted
cytokines for B cells, whereas APCs provide them for T cells.

=== Original PDF page 1441 ===
1402   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems

PROBLEMS

Which statements are true? Explain why or why not.     found that when they incubated noninfected living cells in
                                                       high concentrations of certain peptides derived from the
24–1  T  cells whose receptors strongly bind a  self-     viral nuclear protein, the cells became sensitive to lysis by
peptide–self-MHC complex are killed off in peripheral    subsequent incubation with the cytotoxic T cells. Using
lymphoid organs when they encounter the self peptide on    various peptides from the 1968 strain and the 1934 strain
an antigen-presenting dendritic cell.                        (with which the cytotoxic T cells did not react), the authors
                                                         defined the particular peptide responsible for the killing24–2   To guarantee that the antigen-presenting cells
                                                       response of the T cell (Figure Q24–1).
in the thymus will display a complete repertoire of self
                                                        A.     Which part of the viral protein gives rise to thepeptides to allow elimination of self-reactive T cells, the
thymus recruits dendritic cells from all over the body.        peptide that is recognized by the clone of cytotoxic T cells?
                                         Why do not all of the viral peptides sensitize the target cells
24–3   The antibody diversity created by the combinato-     for lysis by the cytotoxic T cells?
rial joining of V, D, and J segments by V(D)J recombination    B.        It is known that the MHC proteins come to the cell
pales in comparison to the enormous diversity created                                                            surface with peptides already bound. How then do you
by the random gain and loss of nucleotides at V, D, and J                                                     imagine that these experiments worked when the peptides
joining sites.                                                   were added to the outside of the living target cells?

Discuss the following problems.
                                                                                  (A)               345–360              365–380
24–4  Why do living trees not rot? Redwood trees, for
                                                                    1968  DLRVLSFIRGTKVSPRGKLSTRGVQIASNENMDAMESSTLELRSexample, can live for centuries, but once they die they
decay fairly quickly. What might this suggest?                   1934  DLRVLSFIKGTKVVPRGKLSTRGVQIASNENMETMESSTLELRS
24–5     It would be disastrous if a complement lytic attack                                               369–382
were not confined to the surface of the pathogen that is the      (B)                            1968          1934
target of the attack. Yet, the proteolytic cascade involved in       (%) 80
the attack liberates biologically active molecules at several        60                                                                                                                                                                 lysis 40steps: one that diffuses away and one that remains bound
                                                                                                                                 cell 20to the target surface. How does the complement attack
                                                                        0
remain localized to the pathogen when active products            none  1968 1934  345– 365–  369–  365– 369–
leave the pathogen surface?                                                                 strain strain  360  380   382   380  382

24–6  On the basis of its sequence similarity to Apobec1,     Figure Q24–1 Viral nuclear protein recognition by cytotoxic T cells
                                                                     (Problem 24–7). (A) Sequences of a segment of the nuclear proteinwhich deaminates C to U in RNA, activation-induced                                                                    from the 1968 and 1934 strains of influenza virus. Peptides used in
deaminase (AID) was originally proposed to work on RNA.     the experiments in B are highlighted by pink bars. The amino acid
But definitive experiments in Escherichia coli demon-     differences between the viral proteins are highlighted in blue.
strated that AID deaminates C to U in DNA. The authors      (B) Cytotoxic T cell–mediated lysis of target cells. The target cells
of the paper expressed AID in bacteria and followed muta-    were untreated (none), transfected with nuclear protein genes (1968
                                                                            or 1934 strain), or preincubated with high concentrations of nuclear
tions in a selectable gene. They found that AID expression                                                                              protein peptides from the 1968 or 1934 strain, as indicated by the
increased mutations about fivefold above the background     yellow highlights.
level in the absence of AID expression. More import-
ant, they found that 80% of the induced mutations were                                                 24–8   Working out the roles of MHC proteins in T cellG → A or C → T. Does this fit with your expectation if                                                         antigen recognition was complicated. One of the key obser-
AID-induced mutations arose by deamination of C to U in                                                            vations came from studying how different kinds of class I
the DNA?                                  MHC proteins influence the way cytotoxic T cells killed
         [Hint: Imagine what would happen if the G:U mis-                                                                     cells infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
match created by AID was replicated several times; how                                                  (LCMV). Cytotoxic T cells derived from mice expressing
would the sequences of the final mutations relate to the                                                            “k-type” class I MHC proteins lysed LCMV-infected cells
original G-C base pair?]                                                          expressing the same k-type MHC protein, but they did not
24–7   For many years it was a complete mystery how    lyse LCMV-infected cells from mice expressing “d-type”
cytotoxic T cells could recognize and respond to a viral    class  I MHC proteins (Figure Q24–2). Similarly, cyto-
protein in a virus-infected cell when the protein seemed to    toxic T cells from d-type mice infected with LCMV lysed
be present only in the nucleus of the cell. The answer was    infected d-type cells, but not infected k-type cells. LCMV
revealed in a classic paper that took advantage of a clone of    can kill both k-type and d-type mice.
cytotoxic T cells whose T cell receptor (TCR) was directed    A.         If homozygous d-type mice were bred to homozy-
against an antigen associated with the nuclear protein of    gous k-type mice to generate d-type/k-type heterozygous
the 1968 strain of influenza virus. The authors of the paper    progeny, would you expect that cytotoxic T cells derived

=== Original PDF page 1442 ===
PROBLEMS                                                                              1403


 LCMV                    LCMV infected          T cells kill      studied T-cell–dendritic-cell interactions in the absence
                                                             target cells      of specific antigen. They isolated T cells and dendritic
                                   k-type mouse                                                      YES          cells from unimmunized mice, labeled the T cells green                                     ﬁbroblasts
                                                and the dendritic cells red, and injected them into an
                                                unimmunized mouse. After 20 hours, they isolated a local
                                   d-type mouse
     k-type mouse     cytotoxic      ﬁbroblasts           NO       lymph node and scored the contacts between the two cell
                     T cells                                    types visually using two-photon fluorescence microscopy
                  added to                                   (Figure Q24–3A). The frequency of contacts between the
Figure Q24–2 Pattern of killing of LCMV-infected fibroblasts by         two types of cells is given in Figure Q24–3B. Assuming that
cytotoxic T cells from an LCMV-infected k-type mouse (Problem 24–8).    100 dendritic cells present a specific antigen in an immu-
                                                        nized mouse, how long would it take them to scan 105
from these LCMV-infected heterozygotes would be able   T cells to find one or more antigen-specific T cells? How
to lyse LCMV-infected d-type cells? How about LCMV-in-    long to scan 106 T cells?
fected k-type cells? Explain your answers.                                                 24–10  At first glance, it would seem a dangerous strategy
B.     Oddly enough, LCMV infection does not kill mice     for the thymus to actively promote the survival, matura-
that lack a thymus (and therefore lack T cells)—such as     tion, and emigration of developing T cells that bind weakly
“nude” mice, so called because they also lack hair. If a thy-    to self peptides bound to self MHC proteins. Would  it
mus is transplanted back into a nude mouse, the mouse    not be safer to get rid of these T cells, along with those
will then die when infected with LCMV. Suppose that    that bind strongly to such self-peptide–self-MHC com-
a developing d-type/k-type heterozygous nude mouse    plexes, as this would seem a more secure way to avoid
was given a thymus from a d-type donor and was later   autoimmune reactions?
infected with LCMV. Would you expect its cytotoxic T cells
to be able to lyse LCMV-infected d-type cells? How about   24–11 CD4 proteins on helper and regulatory T cells
infected k-type cells? Explain your answers.                  serve as co-receptors that bind to invariant parts of class
                                                                               II MHC proteins. CD4 is thought to increase the adhesion
24–9   Before exposure to a foreign antigen, T cells with   between T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that
receptors specific for the antigen are a tiny fraction of    are initially connected only weakly by the TCR bound to
the T cells—of the order 1 in 105 or 1 in 106 T cells. After     its specific peptide–MHC complex. To test this possibility,
exposure to the antigen, only a small number of den-   you label cell-surface MHC proteins with a fluorescently
dritic cells typically display the antigen on their surface.    labeled peptide so that you can detect individual peptide–
How long does it take for such antigen-presenting den-  MHC complexes at the interface between the APCs and
dritic cells to interact with the antigen-specific T cells,    the T cells in a culture dish. To detect T cell responses—
which is the key first step in T cell activation and clonal    the sign of a productive contact—you load them with
expansion? To begin to address this question, scientists    a Ca2+ indicator dye to detect the increase in cytosolic
                                                 Ca2+ that occurs when lymphocytes are activated. You
                                           now count the peptide–MHC complexes at a large num-              (A)
                                 1           1                  ber of interfaces (immunological synapses) and measure                    1                                                3                the Ca2+ signal in the adherent T cells (Figure Q24–4, red                      *           *          *
                    2           2   3                               dots). When you repeat the experiment in the presence of
                                                          blocking antibodies against CD4, you get a different result
                  0:35          1:20          2:30                      (blue dots). Do these results support or refute the notion
               (B)                                                  that CD4 augments T-cell–APC binding? Explain your
                 600                                        answer.


                 400                                                                                   40

                                                                                   30                                                                encounters 200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  uptake
                                                                                   20
                   0
                    0    10   20   30   40   50   60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        calcium 10                                  minutes
                                                                                    0
Figure Q24–3 Scanning of the T cell repertoire by dendritic cells in the                        0      20     40     60     80
absence of antigen (Problem 24–9). (A) Contacts between different                          number of peptide–MHC complexes
T cells and one dendritic cell. T cells are green and dendritic cells
are red. The dendritic cell labeled with an asterisk contacts a total of        Figure Q24–4 Role of CD4 in the T cell response (Problem 24–11). The
three T cells (numbered) over time in this sequence of images. Times       uptake of Ca2+ in cells with different numbers of fluorescently labeled
are shown as hours:minutes. (B) Plot of T cell contacts for individual       peptide–MHC complexes at the interface between the T cells and the
dendritic cells over time. (A, from P. Bousso and E. Robey, Nat.             antigen-presenting cells. The results in the absence of CD4-blocking
Immunol. 4:579–585, published 2003 by Nature Publishing Group.          antibodies are shown by the red curve; results in the presence of CD4
Reproduced with permission of SNCSC.)                                   antibodies are shown by the blue curve.

=== Original PDF page 1443 ===
1404   Chapter 24:  The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems

REFERENCES
General                                                              Weisel F & Shlomchik M (2017) Memory B cells of mice and humans.
                                                                     Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 255–284.Abbas AK, Lichtman AH & Pillai S (2019) Basic Immunology: Functions
   and Disorders of the Immune System, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
                                      B Cells and ImmunoglobulinsMurphy K, Weaver C & Berg L (2022) Janeway’s Immunobiology,
    10th ed. New York: Norton.                                      Bournazos S, Wang TT, Dahan R . . . Ravetch JV (2017) Signaling by
Parham P (2021) The Immune System, 5th ed. New York: Norton.               antibodies: recent progress. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 285–311.
                                                          Carmona LM & Schatz DG (2017) New insights into the evolutionary
The Innate Immune System                                               origins of the recombination-activating gene proteins and V(D)J
                                                                            recombination. FEBS J. 284, 1590–1605.
Chan AH & Schroder K (2020) Inflammasome signaling and regulation
                                                                        Ebert A, Hill L & Busslinger M (2015) Spatial regulation of V-(D)J    of interleukin-1 cytokines. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20190314.
                                                                          recombination at antigen receptor loci. Adv. Immunol. 128, 93–121.
Chao S & Pamer EG (2011) Monocyte recruitment during infection and
                                                                                Eibel H, Kraus H, Sic H . . . Rizzi M (2014) B cell biology: an overview.    inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 762–774.
                                                                                    Curr. Allergy Asthma Rep. 14, 434–444.
Gallo RL & Hooper LV (2012) Epithelial antimicrobial defence of the skin
                                                                                             Gitlin AD, Shulman Z & Nussenzweig MC (2014) Clonal selection in   and intestine. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 503–516.
                                                                             the germinal centre by regulated proliferation and hypermutation.
Iwasaki A & Medzhitov R (2015) Control of adaptive immunity by the                                                                        Nature 29, 509, 637–640.
    innate immune system. Nat. Immunol. 16, 343–353.
                                                                                 Imkeller K & Wardemann H (2018) Assessing human B cell repertoire
Janeway CA, Jr & Medzhitov R (2002) Innate immune recognition. Adv.                                                                                          diversity and convergence. Immunol. Rev. 284, 51–66.
    Immunol. 109, 87–124.
                                                       Kwak K, Akkaya M & Pierce SK (2020) B cell signaling in context. Nat.
Kumar H, Kawai T & Akira S (2011) Pathogen recognition by the innate                                                                      Immunol. 20, 963–969.
   immune system. Int. Rev. Immunol. 30, 16–34.
                                                             Lu LL, Suscovich TJ, Fortune SM & Alter G (2018) Beyond binding:
Kumar S (2018) Natural killer cell toxicity and its regulation by inhibitory                                                                           antibody effector functions in infectious diseases. Nat. Rev.
    receptors. Immunology 154, 383–393.                                                                      Immunol. 18, 46–61.
Liew PX & Kubes P (2019) The neutrophil’s role during health and                                                                 Methot SP & Di Noia JM (2017) Molecular mechanisms of somatic
    disease. Physiol. Rev. 99, 1223–1248.                                                                         hypermutation and class switch recombination. Adv. Immunol.
Mandal A & Viswanathan C (2015) Natural killer cells: in health and             133, 37–87.
    disease. Hematol. Oncol. Stem Cell Ther. 8, 47–55.                                                     Wang L & Müschen M (2018) Portending death in germinal centers—
McNab F, Mayer-Barber K, Sher A . . . O’Garra A (2015) Type I              when B cells know their time is up. Cell Res. 28, 5–6.
    interferons in infectious disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 87–103.
Meffre E & Iwasaki A (2020) Interferon deficiency can lead to severe      T Cells and MHC Proteins
   COVID. Nature 587, 374–376.
                                                                         Alcover A, Alarcón B & Di Bartolo V (2018) Cell biology of T cell receptor
Newton K & Dixit VM (2012) Signaling in innate immunity and                                                                           expression and regulation. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 36, 103–125.
    inflammation. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4, a006049.
                                                           Blum JS, Wearsch PA & Cresswell P (2013) Pathways of antigen
Reis ES, Mastellos DC, Hajishengallis G & Lambris JD (2019) New                                                                             processing. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 443–473.
    insights into the immune functions of complement. Nat. Rev.
                                                                  Chudnovskiy A, Pasqual G & Victora GD (2019) Studying interactions    Immunol. 19, 503–516.
                                                                  between dendritic cells and T cells in vivo. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 58,
Vijay K (2018) Toll-like receptors in immunity and inflammatory                                                                     24–30.
    diseases: past, present, and future. Int. Immunopharmacol. 59,
                                                                         DiToro D, Winstead CJ, Pham D . . . Weaver CT (2018) Differential   391–412.
                                                                                  IL-2 expression defines developmental fates of follicular versus
Vivier E, Artis D, Colonna M . . . Spits H (2018) Innate lymphoid cells:                                                                                         nonfollicular helper T cells. Science 361(6407), eaao2933.
   10 years on. Cell 174, 1054–1066.
                                                                         Dustin ML & Choudhuri K (2016) Signaling and polarized
Zhao L & Lu W (2014) Defensins in innate immunity. Curr. Opin.                                                                    communication across the T cell immunological synapse. Annu.
    Hematol. 2, 37–42.                                                                             Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32, 303–325.
                                                                        Eisenbarth SC (2019) Dendritic cell subsets in T cell programming:
Overview of the Adaptive Immune System                                                                                   location dictates function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 89–103.
Clark RA (2015) Resident memory T cells in human health and disease.     Gascoigne NR, Rybakin V, Acuto O & Brzostek J (2016) TCR signal
    Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 269rv1.                                                strength and T cell development. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32,
Eckert N, Permanyer M, Yu K, Werth K & Förster R (2019) Chemokines        327–348.
   and other mediators in the development and functional organization     Halle S, Halle O & Förster R (2017) Mechanisms and dynamics of T
    of lymph nodes. Immunol. Rev. 289, 62–83.                                cell-mediated cytotoxicity In vivo. Trends Immunol. 38, 432–443.
Farber DL, Netea MG, Radbruch A . . . Zinkernagel RM (2016)             Kotsias F, Cebrian I & Alloatti A (2019) Antigen processing and
    Immunological memory: lessons from the past and a look to the             presentation. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 348, 69–121.
    future. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 124–128.                                                                            Perniola R (2018) Twenty years of AIRE. Front. Immunol. 9, 98.
Mueller SN & Mackay LK (2016) Tissue-resident memory T cells: local                                                                                      Plitas G & Rudensky AY (2016) Regulatory T cells: differentiation and
    specialists in immune defence. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 79–89.                                                                                    function. Cancer Immunol. Res. 4, 721–725.
Nguyen QP, Deng TZ, Witherden DA & Goldrath AW (2019) Origins of                                                                              Pollard AJ & Bijker EM (2021) A guide to vaccinology: from basic
   CD4+ circulating and tissue-resident memory T-cells. Immunology                                                                                     principles to new developments. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21, 83–100.
    157, 3–12.
                                                                  Rossjohn J, Gras S, Miles JJ . . . McCluskey J (2015) T cell antigen
Palm AE & Henry C (2019) Remembrance of things past: long-term B                                                                             receptor recognition of antigen-presenting molecules. Annu. Rev.
     cell memory after infection and vaccination. Front. Immunol. 10,                                                                      Immunol. 33, 169–200.
   1787.
                                                                  Sakaguchi S, Mikami N, Wing JB. . . Ohkura N (2020) Regulatory T
Pradeu T & Du Pasquier L (2018) Immunological memory: what’s in a                                                                                            cells and human disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 38, 541–566.
   name? Immunol. Rev. 283, 7–20.
                                                                 Steinman RM (2012) Decisions about dendritic cells: past, present, and
Schwartz RH (2012) Historical overview of immunological tolerance.                                                                                         future. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 1–22.
   Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4, a006908.