=== Original PDF page 1 ===


=== Original PDF page 2 ===
Molecular Biology of
THE CELLSeventh Edition

=== Original PDF page 3 ===


=== Original PDF page 4 ===
Molecular Biology of
THE CELLSeventh Edition




                    Bruce Alberts

                  Rebecca Heald

                 Alexander Johnson

                   David Morgan

                     Martin Raff

                      Keith Roberts

                      Peter Walter





                  With problems by

                   John Wilson

                    Tim Hunt

=== Original PDF page 5 ===
W. W. Norton & Company has been independent since its founding in 1923, when
William Warder Norton and Mary D. Herter Norton first published lectures delivered at
the People’s Institute, the adult education division of New York City’s Cooper Union. The
firm soon expanded its program beyond the Institute, publishing books by celebrated
academics from America and abroad. By midcentury, the two major pillars of Norton’s
publishing program—trade books and college texts—were firmly established. In the
1950s, the Norton family transferred control of the company to its employees, and
today—with a staff of five hundred and hundreds of trade, college, and professional
titles published each year—W. W. Norton & Company stands as the largest and oldest
publishing house owned wholly by its employees.

Copyright © 2022 by Bruce Alberts, Rebecca Heald, Alexander Johnson, David Morgan,
Martin Raff, Keith Roberts, Peter Walter, the Estate of Julian Lewis, John Wilson, and
Tim Hunt

All rights reserved
Printed in Canada

Editor: Betsy Twitchell
Editorial Advisor: Denise Schanck
Senior Associate Managing Editor, College: Carla L. Talmadge
Assistant Editor: Danny Vargo
Director of College Production: Jane Searle
Copyeditor: Christopher Curioli
Proofreaders: Julie Henderson, Susan McColl
Managing Editor, College: Marian Johnson
Media Editor: Todd Pearson
Smartwork Editor: Christopher Rapp
Media Project Editor: Jesse Newkirk
Associate Media Editor: Jasmine N. Ribeaux
Media Assistant Editor: Lindsey Heale
Ebook Production Manager: Kate Barnes
Managing Editor, College Digital Media: Kim Yi
Marketing Manager, Biology: Ruth Bolster
Director of College Permissions: Megan Schindel
Photo Editor: Thomas Persano
Permissions Associate: Patricia Wong
Design: Juan Paolo Francisco
Illustrator: Nigel Orme
Composition: Graphic World, Inc.
Manufacturing: Transcontinental—Beauceville

Permission to use copyrighted material is included alongside the appropriate content.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Alberts, Bruce, author.
Title: Molecular biology of the cell / Bruce Alberts, Rebecca Heald,
 Alexander Johnson, David Morgan, Martin Raff, Keith Roberts, Peter
 Walter.
Description: Seventh edition. | New York : W. W. Norton & Company, [2022] |
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021049376 | ISBN 9780393884821 (hardcover) | ISBN
 9780393884630 (epub)
Subjects: MESH: Cells | Molecular Biology
Classification: LCC QH581.2 | NLM QU 300 | DDC 572.8—dc23/eng/20211015
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021049376

W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., 15 Carlisle Street, London W1D 3BS

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0

=== Original PDF page 6 ===
                                                                                                 v


Preface




Why a cell biology textbook? What is its value in a world of online resources
so vast that any information you might want about cells is, in principle, freely
available a few taps away?
   The answer is that a textbook provides what open-ended Internet searches
cannot—a curation of knowledge and an expert, accurate guide to the beauty
and complexities of cells. Our book provides a narrative that leads the reader log-
ically and progressively through the key concepts, components, and experiments
in such a way that readers can build for themselves a memorable, conceptual
framework for cell biology—a framework that will allow them to understand and
critically evaluate the exciting rush of new discoveries. That is what we have tried
to do in Molecular Biology of the Cell for each of its seven editions.
   This edition was completed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many of the
questions that this global crisis generated are cell biological questions­—including
how the virus gets into our cells, how it replicates, how our immune system
responds, how vaccines are developed, and how scientists produce the molecular
details of virus structure. Required for the rapid development of safe and effective
COVID-19 vaccines, answers to all of these questions can be found in this text-
book. To make room for them, as well as for many other major recent advances in
our knowledge, much previous content had to be removed.
   Understanding the inner workings of cells requires more than words. Our
book contains more than 1500 illustrations that create a parallel narrative, closely
interwoven with the text. Each figure has been designed to highlight a key con-
cept. The unique clarity, simplicity, and consistency of the figures across chapters,
achieved by use of a common set of icon designs and colors (for example, DNA red
and proteins green), enables students to scan them as chapter overviews. In this
edition, important protein structures are depicted and their Protein Data Bank
(PDB) codes provided; these codes link to tools on the RCSB PDB website (www
.rcsb.org), where students can more fully explore the proteins that lie at the core of
cell biology. In addition, more than 180 narrated movies have been produced for
the book, each linked to the text to provide additional insights.
   John Wilson and Tim Hunt have again contributed their distinctive and imagi-
native problems to help students gain a more active understanding of the text. The
end-of-chapter problems emphasize experiments and quantitative approaches
in order to encourage critical thinking. Their Digital Problems Book in Smartwork
greatly expands on these self-assessment problems and includes data analysis
and video review questions that are based on the movie links in the textbook.
  Many millions of scientific papers are relevant to cell biology, and many import-
ant new ones are published daily. The challenge for textbook writers is to sort
through this overwhelming wealth of information to produce a clear and accurate
conceptual platform for understanding how cells work. We have aimed high, seeking
primarily to support the education of cell biology students, including the next gener-
ation of bioscientists, but also to support active scientists pursuing new fundamental
research and the search for practical advances to improve the human condition.
   So, why read a textbook? We live in a world that presents humanity with many
challenging problems related to cell biology, including declining biodiversity,
climate change, food insecurity, environmental degradation, resource depletion,
and animal and plant diseases. We hope that this new edition of our textbook
will help the reader to better understand these problems and—for many—to
contribute to solving them.

=== Original PDF page 7 ===
vi


Note to the Reader




What’s New in the Seventh Edition?
Every chapter in the Seventh Edition has been significantly updated with informa-
tion on new discoveries in the field of cell biology. Examples of this new content
include:

• Updated information on the continuing impact of human genome research,
  including what has been learned from sequencing hundreds of thousands
  of human genomes (Chapter 4), and updated coverage of tumor genomes
  (Chapter 20).
• New research on pathogens, diseases, and methods of combating them,
  including discussion of COVID-19 (Chapters 1, 5, and 23) and mRNA vaccines
  (Chapter 24).
• Updated research on cellular organization, including new information on
  biomolecular condensates (Chapters 3, 6, 7, 12, and 14) and on chromosome
  organization by DNA loop extrusion (Chapters 4, 7, and 17).
• Expanded coverage of new microscope technologies, including superresolu-
  tion light microscopy and atomic resolution electron microscopy (Chapter 9),
  and new research breakthroughs from cryo-electron microscopy, such as
  stretch-activated Piezo channels (Chapter 11).
• New coverage of evolution, including a new discussion on the diversity of life
  (Chapter 1), plus updates on both human (Chapter 4) and HIV (Chapter 23)
  evolution.

In addition, a quarter of the book’s illustrations are either completely new or
significantly updated for accuracy, clarity, and visual appeal.
    Finally, we are thrilled to offer online assessment, for the first time, with the
Digital Problems Book in Smartwork—reimagining the classic companion text,
The Problems Book, for twenty-first century instructors and students.

Structure of the Book
Although the chapters of this book can be read independently of one another, they
are arranged in a logical sequence of five parts. The first three chapters of Part I
cover elementary principles and basic biochemistry. They can serve either as an
introduction for those who have not studied biochemistry or as a refresher course
for those who have. Part II deals with the storage, expression, and transmission
of genetic information. Part III presents the principles of the main experimental
methods for investigating and analyzing cells; here, a section titled “Mathematical
Analysis of Cell Function” in Chapter 8 provides an extra dimension in our under-
standing of cell regulation and function. Part IV describes the internal organization
of the cell. Part V follows the behavior of cells in multicellular systems, starting
with how cells become attached to each other and concluding with chapters on
pathogens and infection and on the innate and adaptive immune systems.

End-of-Chapter Problems
A selection of problems, written by John Wilson and Tim Hunt, appears in the
text at the end of each chapter. Solutions to these problems are available on the
Norton Teaching Tools site.

=== Original PDF page 8 ===
                                                           Note to the Reader    vii


References
A concise list of selected references is included at the end of each chapter. These
are arranged in alphabetical order by author surname under the main chapter
section headings. These references often include the original papers in which
the most critical discoveries were first reported. The ebook also includes the DOI
identifier for the references, making it easy for students to access the articles.

Glossary Terms
Throughout the book, boldface type has been used to highlight key terms at the
point in a chapter where the main discussion occurs. Italic type is used to set off
important terms with a lesser degree of emphasis. At the end of the book is an
expanded glossary, covering all the major terms common to cell biology; it should
be the first resort for a reader who encounters an unfamiliar technical word.

Website for Students
Resources for students are available at digital.wwnorton.com/mboc7. The com-
plete glossary as well as a set of flashcards are available on this student website.

=== Original PDF page 9 ===
viii


Nomenclature for Genes
and Proteins




Each species has its own conventions for naming genes; the only common
feature is that they are always set in italics. In some species (such as humans),
gene names are spelled out all in capital letters; in other species (such as
zebrafish), all in lowercase; in yet others (most mouse genes), with the first letter
in uppercase and the rest in lowercase; or (as in Drosophila) with different
combinations of uppercase and lowercase, according to whether the first mutant
allele to be discovered produced a dominant or recessive phenotype. Conven-
tions for naming protein products are equally varied.
   This typographical chaos drives everyone crazy. Moreover, there are many
occasions, especially in a book such as this, where we need to refer to a gene
generically—without specifying the mouse version, the human version, the
chick version, or the hippopotamus version—because the gene variants across
species are all equivalent for the purposes of our discussion. What convention
then should we use?
  We have decided in this book to follow a uniform rule. We write all gene names
with the first letter in uppercase and the rest in lowercase, and all in italics, thus:
Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. The corresponding protein, where it is named
after the gene, will be written in the same way, but in roman rather than italic
letters: Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. When it is necessary to specify the
organism, this can be done with a prefix to the gene name.
   For completeness, we list a few further details of naming rules that we shall
follow. In some instances, an added letter in the gene name is traditionally used
to distinguish between genes that are related by function or evolution; for those
genes, we put that letter in uppercase if it is usual to do so (LacZ, RecA, HoxA4).
Proteins are more of a problem. Many of them have names in their own right,
assigned to them before the gene was named. Such protein names take many
forms, although most of them traditionally begin with a lowercase letter (actin,
hemoglobin, catalase); others are acronyms (such as GFP, for green fluorescent
protein, or BMP4, for bone morphogenetic protein 4). To force all such protein
names into a uniform style would do too much violence to established usages,
and we shall simply write them in the traditional way. For the corresponding gene
names in all these cases, we shall nevertheless follow our standard rule: Actin,
Hemoglobin, Catalase, Bmp4, Gfp.
   For those who wish to know them, the table shows some of the official con-
ventions for individual species—conventions that we shall mostly violate in this
book, in the manner shown.

=== Original PDF page 10 ===
                                          Nomenclature for Genes and Proteins    ix



                                     Species-specific convention                Unified convention used in this book

Organism                Gene                       Protein         Gene                 Protein

Mouse                   Hoxa4                  Hoxa4          HoxA4             HoxA4

                     Bmp4               BMP4         Bmp4           BMP4

                                   integrin a-1, Itga1            integrin α1          Integrin a1, Itga1       integrin α1

Human                HOXA4               HOXA4         HoxA4             HoxA4

Zebrafish                      cyclops, cyc                Cyclops, Cyc      Cyclops, Cyc          Cyclops, Cyc

Caenorhabditis              unc-6                 UNC-6         Unc6              Unc6

Drosophila                    sevenless, sev (named      Sevenless, SEV    Sevenless, Sev        Sevenless, Sev
                                    after recessive phenotype)

                           Deformed, Dfd (named      Deformed, DFD    Deformed, Dfd        Deformed, Dfd
                                    after dominant mutant
                            phenotype)


Yeast

  Saccharomyces cerevisiae  CDC28                  Cdc28, Cdc28p   Cdc28             Cdc28
  (budding yeast)

  Schizosaccharomyces     Cdc2                    Cdc2, Cdc2p     Cdc2             Cdc2
 pombe (fission yeast)

Arabidopsis                GAI                     GAI              Gai                 GAI

Escherichia coli               uvrA                     UvrA            UvrA                UvrA

=== Original PDF page 11 ===
x


Resources for Instructors



digital.wwnorton.com/mboc7

Designed to enrich the classroom experience, Instructor Resources are available
at digital.wwnorton.com/mboc7. Adopting instructors can obtain access to the
site from their sales representative, who can be identified by visiting wwnorton
.com/educator and clicking the “Find My Rep” button.

The Digital Problems Book in Smartwork
For the first time, the popular print supplement Molecular Biology of the Cell:
The Problems Book is now available in Smartwork. Easier for instructors to assign
and more helpful to students because of each question’s pedagogical scaffolding,
the Digital Problems Book in Smartwork features the questions authored by Tim
Hunt and John Wilson adapted for digital delivery. An enormous library of almost
3500 questions that include critical thinking questions, data analysis questions,
and animation and video questions, allows instructors to deliver the exact type
of assessment that their students need. The Digital Problems Book in Smartwork
comes at no additional cost with all new copies of Molecular Biology of the Cell.

=== Original PDF page 12 ===
                                                   Resources for Instructors    xi


Norton Teaching Tools
The Norton Teaching Tools site for Molecular Biology of the Cell provides creative
and engaging resources to refresh a syllabus or to design a new one. Dynamic,
experienced instructors have created primary literature suggestions, active learn-
ing activities, lecture PowerPoint files, descriptions of all of the animations and
videos, and much more. All of the teaching tools are aligned with chapter topics
and organized by activity type, making it easily sortable. The site also features tips
for assigning Norton’s digital learning tools and addressing the most common
course challenges.

Animations and Videos
Under the authorial direction of Michele M. McDonough and Thomas A. Volpe,
both of Northwestern University, the animations and video library has been
thoroughly updated and expanded. The more than 180 animations and videos are
integrated into the ebook and also available to students and instructors at digital
.wwnorton.com/mboc7. Instructors can view descriptions of each on the Norton
Teaching Tools site.

Norton Ebook
The purchase of any new print copy of the Seventh Edition of Molecular Biology
of the Cell includes access to the Norton Ebook version of the text at no additional
cost. The Norton Ebook can be purchased as an affordable stand-alone option
that provides an active reading experience, enabling students to take notes, book-
mark, search, highlight, and read offline. All of the videos and animations appear
directly in the ebook, and instructors can add notes that students can see as they
are reading the text.

Art of Molecular Biology of the Cell, Seventh Edition
The images from the book are available in two convenient formats: PowerPoint
and JPEG, and in both labeled and unlabeled versions.

Figure-integrated Lecture Outlines
The section headings, concept headings, and figures from the text have been inte-
grated into PowerPoint presentations and can be customized. For example, the
content of these presentations can be combined with videos, questions from the
book, or activities in the Norton Teaching Tools site, in order to create unique
lectures that facilitate interactive learning.

Test Bank
Updated for the Seventh Edition, the test bank includes a variety of question for-
mats: multiple choice, short answer, fill-in-the-blank, true–false, and matching.
The test bank was created with the philosophy that a good exam should require
students to reflect upon and integrate information as a part of a sound understand-
ing. Questions are classified by section and difficulty, making it easy to construct
tests and quizzes. The test bank question library includes about 70 questions per
chapter, ensuring instructors can find the right questions for their exams. It will
be delivered through Norton Testmaker, which brings the high-quality questions
in the test bank online. Create assessments for your course without downloading
files or installing specialized software, customize test bank questions, and easily
export your tests to Microsoft Word or Common Cartridge files for your learning
management system (LMS).

=== Original PDF page 13 ===
xii


About the Authors




Bruce Alberts received his PhD from Harvard University and is the Chancellor’s
Leadership Chair in Biochemistry and Biophysics for Science and Education,
University of California, San Francisco. He was the editor-in-chief of Science mag-
azine from 2008 until 2013, and for twelve years he served as president of the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences (1993–2005).

Rebecca Heald received her PhD from Harvard University and is professor of
molecular and cell biology at the University of California, Berkeley. She also
serves as the co-chair of that department.

Alexander Johnson received his PhD from Harvard University and is professor of
microbiology and immunology at the University of California, San Francisco. He
is also director of the Program in Biological Sciences (PIBS) at UCSF.

David Morgan received his PhD from the University of California, San Francisco,
and is professor of the Department of Physiology there as well as vice dean for
research in the School of Medicine.

Martin Raff received his MD from McGill University and is an emeritus professor
of biology and an affiliated member of the Medical Research Council Laboratory
for Molecular Cell Biology at University College London.

Keith Roberts received his PhD from the University of Cambridge and was dep-
uty director of the John Innes Centre, Norwich. He is emeritus professor at the
University of East Anglia.

Peter Walter received his PhD from the Rockefeller University in New York and
is professor of the Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics at the University
of California, San Francisco, and an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute.

John Wilson received his PhD from the California Institute of Technology. He is
Distinguished Emeritus Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at Bay-
lor College of Medicine in Houston.

Tim Hunt received his PhD from the University of Cambridge, where he taught
biochemistry and cell biology for more than 20 years. He worked at Cancer
Research UK from 1990 to 2010. He shared the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine with Lee Hartwell and Paul Nurse. He moved to Okinawa in 2016.

=== Original PDF page 14 ===
                                                                                                                                                              xiii


Acknowledgments




We once again thank our spouses, partners, families, friends, and colleagues
for their continuing patience and support, without which the writing of this new
edition of our textbook would not have been possible. As always, we are also
indebted to a large number of scientists whose generous help has been essential
for making the text as clear, up-to-date, and accurate as possible.
   Deserving special credit are the following five outstanding scientists who
accepted the task of re-drafting chapters in their areas of expertise: Chapters 12
and 13, Ramanujan Hegde (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Cam-
bridge University, United Kingdom); Chapter 14, Jared Rutter (University of
Utah); Chapter 21, David Bilder (University of California, Berkeley); Chapter 22,
Yukiko Yamashita (Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology);
Chapter 23, Matthew Welch (University of California, Berkeley).
   In what follows, we acknowledge and thank all of the scientists whose
suggestions have helped us to prepare  this edition. (A combined  list of
those who helped with our first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth editions is
also provided.)

General: Joseph Ahlander (Northeastern State University),     University), Pei-Lan Tsou (Grand Valley State University),
Buzz Baum (Molecular Research Institute, United           Andrew Wood (Southern Illinois University).
Kingdom), Michael Burns (Loyola University Chicago),       Chapter 3: Sage Arbor (Marian University Indianapolis),
Silvia C. Finnemann (Fordham University), Nora Goosen       Jennifer Armstrong (Scripps College), David Baker
(Leiden University, The Netherlands), Harold Hoops (State     (University of Washington, Seattle), Anne Bertolotti (MRC
University of New York, Buffalo), Joanna Norris (University     Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom),
of Rhode Island), Mark V. Reedy (Creighton University),       Ashok Bidwai (West Virginia University), Douglas Briant
Jeff Singer (Portland State University), Amy Springer            (University of Victoria, Canada), Ken Dill (State University
(University of Massachusetts), Andreas Wodarz (University     of New York, Stony Brook), David S. Eisenberg (University
of Cologne, Germany). In addition, Tiago Barros produced     of California, Los Angeles), James Fraser (University of
new molecular models for the Seventh Edition.                 California, San Francisco), Elizabeth Good (University of
Chapter 1: Sage Arbor (Marian University Indianapolis),         Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Ramanujan Hegde (MRC
Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Jill Banfield (University    Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom), Jerry
of California, Berkeley), Zoë Burke (University of Bath,          E. Honts (Drake University), Sue Hum-Musser (Western
United Kingdom), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois,         Illinois University), Tony Hyman (Max Planck Institute of
Urbana-Champaign), Julian Guttman (Simon Fraser          Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Germany), Albert
University, Canada), Sudhir Kuman (Temple University),      Lee (Macquarie University, Australia), Susan Marqusee
Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University), Brad            (University of California, Berkeley), Brad Mehrtens (University
Mehrtens (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign),          of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Jose Rodriguez (University
Inaki Ruiz-Trillo (University of Barcelona, Spain),               of California, Los Angeles), Michael Rosen (University of
David Stern (Janelia Research Campus), Andrew Wood        Texas Southwestern), Seth Rubin (University of California,
(Southern Illinois University), Lidan You (University of        Santa Cruz), Jonathan Weissman (University of California,
Toronto, Canada).                                     San Francisco), Andrew Wood (Southern Illinois
Chapter 2: Sage Arbor (Marian University Indianapolis),        University).
Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Monica Brinchmann      Chapter 4: Blake Bextine (University of Texas, Tyler),
(Nord University, Norway), Michael Cardinal-Aucoin        Wendy Bickmore (University of Edinburgh, United
(Lakehead University, Orillia, Canada), Venugopalan         Kingdom), Zoë Burke (University of Bath, United
Cheriyath (Texas A&M University, Commerce), Mark         Kingdom), Greg Cooper (HudsonAlpha Institute for
Grimes (University of Montana), Sue Hum-Musser            Biotechnology, Huntsville), Caroline Dean (John Innes
(Western Illinois University), Brad Mehrtens (University        Centre, United Kingdom), Job Dekker (University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Richard Roy (McGill           of Massachusetts Medical School), Barbara Ehlting
University, Canada), Seth Rubin (University of California,       (University of Victoria, Canada), Lisa Farmer (University
Santa Cruz), Laura Serbus (Florida International                of Houston), Shiv Grewal (National Institutes of Health),

=== Original PDF page 15 ===
xiv   Acknowledgments


Paul Himes (University of Louisville), Sue Hum-Musser         Phillip A. Sharp (Massachusetts Institute of Technology),
(Western Illinois University), Tom Misteli (National           Kevin Struhl (Harvard Medical School), Igor Ulitsky
Institutes of Health), Rick Myers (HudsonAlpha Institute      (Weizmann Institute of Science), Ken Zaret (University
for Biotechnology, Huntsville), Geeta Nalikar (University       of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine).
of California, San Francisco), Craig Peterson (University       Chapter 8: Eric Chow (University of California, San
of Massachusetts Medical School), Allison Piovesan            Francisco), Barbara Ehlting (University of Victoria,
(University of Bologna, Italy), Saumya Ramanathan           Canada), Lisa Farmer (University of Houston), Daniel
(Fisk University), Irina Solovei (Ludwig Maximilians           Frigo (University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center),
University, Germany), Chisato Ushida (Hirosaki University,    Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University), Véronique
Japan), Ken Zaret (University of Pennsylvania).              Moulin (Université Laval, Canada), John Steele (Humboldt
Chapter 5: Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Blake           State University), Venkat Ventkataraman (Rowan
Bextine (University of Texas, Tyler), Stephen P. Bell              University).
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Michael Cardinal-    Chapter 9: Eric Betzig (Howard Hughes Medical Institute),
Aucoin (Lakehead University, Orillia, Canada), Julie           Stefano Guido (Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II,
Cooper (National Institutes of Health), John Diffley (The         Italy), Julian Guttman (Simon Fraser University, Canada),
Francis Crick Institute, United Kingdom), Barbara Ehlting     Richard Henderson (MRC Laboratory of Molecular
(University of Victoria, Canada), Lisa Farmer (University       Biology, United Kingdom), Sue Hum-Musser (Western
of Houston), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois,               Illinois University), Lee Ligon (Rensselaer Polytechnic
Urbana-Champaign), James Haber (Brandeis University),       Institute), Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz (Janelia Research
Paul Himes (University of Louisville), Sue Hum-Musser       Campus), Eva Nogales (University of California, Berkeley),
(Western Illinois University), Neil Hunter (University         Helen Saibil (Birkbeck College, University of London,
of California, Davis), Keiko Kono (Okinawa Institute of        United Kingdom), Peter Shaw (John Innes Centre, United
Science and Technology, Japan), Karim Labib (University      Kingdom), Phoebe Stavride (University of Nicosia, Greece),
of Dundee, United Kingdom), Joachim Li (University         John Steele (Humboldt State University), Paul Tillberg
of California, San Francisco), Rob Martienssen (Cold           (Janelia Research Campus).
Spring Harbor Laboratory), Luiza Nogaj (Mount St. Mary’s     Chapter 10: Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Francis
University, Los Angeles), Bruce Stillman (Cold Spring          Barr (Oxford University, United Kingdom), Adam
Harbor Laboratory), Johannes Walter (Harvard Medical        Frost (University of California, San Francisco), Mark
School), Stephen C. West (The Francis Crick Institute,        Grimes (University of Montana), Ramanujan Hegde
United Kingdom), Richard D. Wood (MD Anderson        (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Cambridge
Cancer Center).                                                University, United Kingdom), Gunnar von Heinje
Chapter 6: Katsura Asano (Kansas State University),          (Stockholm University, Sweden), Sue Hum-Musser
Ahmed Badran (Broad Institute, Massachusetts Institute       (Western Illinois University), Michael Jonz (University
of Technology), Matthew Christians (Grand Valley              of Ottawa, Canada), Keiko Kono (Okinawa Institute of
State University), Patrick Cramer (Max Planck Institute        Science and Technology, Japan), Werner Kühlbrandt (Max
for Biophysical Chemistry, Germany), Daniel J. Finley         Planck Institute of Biophysics, Germany), Herman Lehman
(Harvard Medical School), Stephen Floor (University of       (Hamilton College), Satyajit Mayor (National Centre for
California, San Francisco), Elizabeth Good (University of       Biological Sciences, India), Richard Posner (Northern
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Michael R. Green (University    Arizona University), Richard Roy (McGill University,
of Massachusetts Medical School), Arthur L. Horwich         Canada), Gregory Schmaltz (University of the Fraser Valley,
(Yale School of Medicine), Hiten Madhani (University of       Canada), Andrew Swan (University of Windsor, Canada),
California, San Francisco), Saumya Ramanathan (Fisk         Tobias Walther (Harvard Medical School), Graham Warren
University), German Rosas-Acosta (University of Texas, El      (University College London, United Kingdom).
Paso), Mahito Sadaie (Tokyo University of Science, Japan),     Chapter 11: Mauro Costa-Mattioli (Baylor College of
Eric Spana (Duke University), David Tollervey (University      Medicine), Robert Edwards (University of California, San
of Edinburgh, United Kingdom), Chisato Ushida (Hirosaki      Francisco), Zheng Fan (The University of Tennessee Health
University, Japan), Alex Varshavsky (California Institute        Science Center), Mark Grimes (University of Montana),
of Technology), Max Wilkinson (MRC Laboratory of         Ramanujan Hegde (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Molecular Biology, United Kingdom).                    and Cambridge University, United Kingdom), Bertil Hille
Chapter 7: Katsura Asano (Kansas State University),            (University of Washington), Olivia S. Long (University of
David Auble (University of Virginia), David Bartel              Pittsburgh, Greensburg), Werner Kühlbrandt (Max Planck
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Adrian Bird            Institute of Biophysics, Germany), Liqun Luo (Stanford
(University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom), Matthew           University), Poul Nissen (Aarhus University, Denmark),
Christians (Grand Valley State University), Kathleen           Richard Posner (Northern Arizona University), Benoît Roux
Collins (University of California, Berkeley), Elizabeth Good     (University of Chicago), Gregory Schmaltz (University of
(University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Gordon Hagar     the Fraser Valley, Canada), Susan Spencer (Saint Louis
(National Institutes of Health), Edith Heard (European          University), Robert Stroud (University of California,
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg), Agnese Loda     San Francisco), Christine Suetterlin (University of
(European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg),         California, Irvine).
Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University), Tracy         Chapter 12: Major contributor Ramanujan Hegde (MRC
Nissan (University of Sussex), Sofia Origanti (Saint Louis       Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Cambridge University,
University), German Rosas-Acosta (University of Texas, El     United Kingdom). Cedric Asensio (University of Denver),
Paso), Schraga Schwartz (Weizmann Institute of Science),     Buzz Baum (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United

=== Original PDF page 16 ===
                                                            Acknowledgments   xv


Kingdom) Mike Chao (California State University, San        Medical School), Lillian Fritz-Laylin (University of
Bernardino), Edward B. Cluett (Ithaca College), Elizabeth      Massachusetts), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois,
Good (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Yun        Urbana-Champaign), Julian Guttman (Simon Fraser
Hyun Huh (Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,      University, Canada), Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois
South Korea), Tim Levine (University College London,          University), Yulia Komarova (University of Illinois,
United Kingdom), Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois          Chicago), Arash Komeili (University of California,
University), Wendy Innis-Whitehouse (University of Texas,     Berkeley), Chao Liu (Stanford University), Richard
Rio Grande Valley), Mack Ivey (University of Arkansas),       McIntosh (University of Colorado), Dyche Mullins
Stephen Rogers (University of North Carolina), Michael        (University of California, San Francisco), Maxence Nachury
Silverman (Simon Fraser University, Canada), Gina            (University of California, San Francisco), Daniela
Voeltz (University of Colorado, Boulder), Graham Warren       Nicastro (University of Texas Southwestern), Sam Reck-Peterson
(University College London, United Kingdom), Weiliang        (University of California, San Diego), Luke Rice (University
Xia (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China), Ge Yang            of Texas Southwestern), Stephen Rogers (University
(Carnegie Mellon University).                                   of North Carolina), Trina Schroer (Johns Hopkins
Chapter 13: Major contributor Ramanujan Hegde              University), Michael Sixt (IST, Austria), Thomas Surrey
(MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Cambridge        (The Francis Crick Institute, United Kingdom), Tatyana
University, United Kingdom). Swapna Bhat (University         Svitkina (University of Pennsylvania), Katherine Warpeha
of North Georgia, Gainesville), Pete Cullen (University of       (University of Illinois, Chicago), Matthew Welch
Bristol, United Kingdom), Zheng Fan (The University of        (University of California, Berkeley), Lidan You (University
Tennessee Health Science Center), Adam Frost (University     of Toronto, Canada).
of California, San Francisco), Wendy Innis-Whitehouse       Chapter 17: Michael W. Black (California Polytechnic
(University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley), Reinhard              State University), Ann Cavanaugh (Creighton University),
Jahn (Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,        Yu Chen (University of Massachusetts), Frederick Dick
Germany), Elizabeth Miller (MRC Laboratory of Molecular     (University of Western Ontario, Canada), Bruce Edgar
Biology, United Kingdom), Sean Munro (MRC Laboratory      (University of Utah), Michael Glotzer (University of
of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom), Michael Silverman    Chicago), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois, Urbana-
(Simon Fraser University, Canada), Susan Spencer (Saint      Champaign), Greg Hermann (Lewis and Clark College),
Louis University), Christine Suetterlin (University of          Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University), Peter
California, Irvine), Graham Warren (University College       Mayinger (Oregon Health and Science University), Mindy
London, United Kingdom).                                 McCarville (Dalhousie University, Canada), Jennifer
Chapter 14: Major contributor Jared Rutter (University of     McDonough (Kent State University), Yuko Miyamoto
Utah). Cedric Asensio (University of Denver), Alice Barkan     (Elon University), Jonathon Pines (Institute of Cancer
(University of Oregon), Tessa Burch-Smith (University of       Research, United Kingdom), Stephen Rogers (University
Tennessee, Knoxville), Navdeep Chandel (Northwestern        of North Carolina), Frank Uhlmann (The Francis Crick
University), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois, Urbana-      Institute, United Kingdom), Johannes Walter (Harvard
Champaign), Mark Grimes (University of Montana), Yun      Medical School), Katherine Warpeha (University of Illinois,
Hyun Huh (Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,      Chicago), Christina Zito (University of New Haven).
South Korea), Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois            Chapter 18: Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Yu
University), Mack Ivey (University of Arkansas), Werner      Chen (University of Massachusetts), Elizabeth Good
Kühlbrandt (Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Germany),     (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Douglas R.
Dario Leister (University of Munich, Germany), Song-        Green (St. Jude’s Children’s Research Hospital), Mindy
Tao Liu (University of Toledo), Amit Singh (University of       McCarville (Dalhousie University, Canada), Sue Hum-
Dayton), Jonathan Snow (Barnard College), Amy Sprowles     Musser (Western Illinois University), Yuko Miyamoto
(Humboldt State University), Dennis Winge (University        (Elon University), Mark Running (University of Louisville),
of Utah).                                                     Christina Zito (University of New Haven).
Chapter 15: Josefino Castillo (University of Santo Tomas,      Chapter 19: Stephen E. Asmus (Centre College), Zoë Burke
Philippines), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois,             (University of Bath, United Kingdom), John Couchman
Urbana-Champaign), Mark Grimes (University of              (University of Copenhagen, Denmark), Elizabeth
Montana), Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University),    Good (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Tony
Natalia Jura (University of California, San Francisco), In          J.C. Harris (University of Toronto), Sue Hum-Musser
Hye Lee (Ewha Womans University, South Korea), Song-       (Western Illinois University), Yulia Komarova (University
Tao Liu (University of Toledo), Bruce Mayer (University of      of Illinois, Chicago), Zhengchang Liu (University of New
Connecticut), Alexandra Newton (University of California,     Orleans), Mark Running (University of Louisville), Kara
San Diego), Roeland Nusse (Stanford University), Amit        Sawarynski (Oakland University), Masatoshi Takeichi
Singh (University of Dayton), Jonathan Snow (Barnard       (RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Japan), Zena
College), Amy Sprowles (Humboldt State University).        Werb (formerly of University of California, San Francisco),
Chapter 16: Anna Akhmanova (Utrecht University, The       Alpha Yap (University of Queensland, Australia), Christina
Netherlands), Alexander Bershadsky (National University      Zito (University of New Haven).
of Singapore, Singapore), David Bilder (University of          Chapter 20: Alan Ashworth (University of California, San
California, Berkeley), Josefino Castillo (University of            Francisco), Anton Berns (Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Santo Tomas, Philippines), Ann Cavanaugh (Creighton       The Netherlands), David Bilder (University of California,
University), Andrew Carter (Medical Research Council,         Berkeley), Fred Bunz (Johns Hopkins University),
United Kingdom), Roger Craig (University of Massachusetts   Venugopalan Cheriyath (Texas A&M University,

=== Original PDF page 17 ===
xvi   Acknowledgments


Commerce), Michel DuPage (University of California,          of St. Scholastica), Daniel A. Portnoy (University of
Berkeley), Paul Edwards (University of Cambridge,              California, Berkeley), David Sibley (Washington University
United Kingdom), Elizabeth Good (University of Illinois,       in Saint Louis), Michael Way (The Francis Crick Institute,
Urbana-Champaign), Jeff Hadwiger (Oklahoma State         United Kingdom)
University), Monika Haoui (University of California,          Chapter 24: Steven Clark (University of Michigan), Elizabeth
Berkeley), Lin He (University of California, Berkeley),        Good (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Jenean
Dirk Hockemeyer (University of California, Berkeley),         O’Brien (The College of St. Scholastica), Peter Parham
Sue Hum-Musser (Western Illinois University), Doug           (Stanford University), Shamith Samarajiwa (University of
Kellogg (University of California, Santa Cruz), Maria          Cambridge, United Kingdom), Phoebe Stavride (University
Krasilnikova (Pennsylvania State University), Christopher      of Nicosia, Greece), Hariharan Subramanian (Michigan
Lassiter (Roanoke College), Kunxin Luo (University of          State University), Colin Watts (University of Dundee, United
California, Berkeley), Adam G. Matthews (Wellesley          Kingdom), Donald Very (Duquesne University), Debby
College), Mike Misamore (Texas Christian University),         Walser-Kuntz (Carleton College).
Alexander K. Murashov (East Carolina University), Kristina
Pazehoski (Grove City College), David Pellman (Dana      REVIEWERS OF PREVIOUS EDITIONSFarber Cancer Institute), Jody Rosenblatt (University
of Utah), Peter Savage (University of Chicago), Kara             Jerry Adams (The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Sawarynski (Oakland University), Timothy Shannon           Research, Australia), Ralf Adams (London Research
(Francis Marion University), Frederick Sproull (LaRoche        Institute, United Kingdom), Markus Affolter (University of
University), Robert A. Weinberg (Massachusetts Institute       Basel, Switzerland), David Agard (University of California,
of Technology), Harold Varmus (Weill Cornell Medicine),     San Francisco), Julie Ahringer (The Gurdon Institute,
Kenneth Yip (University of Toronto, Canada), Christina        United Kingdom), John Aitchison (Institute for System
Zito (University of New Haven).                                 Biology, Seattle), Michael Akam (University of Cambridge,
Chapter 21: Major contributor David Bilder (University        United Kingdom), Anna Akhmanova (Utrecht University, The
of California, Berkeley). Paul Cullen (State University of        Netherlands), David Allis (The Rockefeller University),
New York, Buffalo), Claude Desplan (New York University),    Wolfhard Almers (Oregon Health and Science University),
Bruce Edgar (University of Utah), Stephen Jesch (Cornell      Fred Alt (CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, Boston),
University), Christopher Lassiter (Roanoke College),           Victor Ambros (University of Massachusetts, Worcester),
Laura Mathies (Virginia Commonwealth University),         Linda Amos (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United
Mike Misamore (Texas Christian University), Alexander       Kingdom), Raul Andino (University of California, San
K. Murashov (East Carolina University), Nipam Patel           Francisco), Oscar Aparicio (University of Southern
(Marine Biological Laboratory), Ruth Phillips (Syracuse         California), Clay Armstrong (University of Pennsylvania),
University), Olivier Pourquié (Harvard University),           Martha Arnaud (University of California, San Francisco),
Joshua Sanes (Harvard University), Ramaswamy Sharma       Najla Arshad (Indian Institute of Science, India), Spyros
(University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio),    Artavanis-Tsakonas (Harvard Medical School), Michael
Jan Skotheim (Stanford University), David Somers (The       Ashburner (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom),
Ohio State University), Didier Stanier (Max Planck Institute    Jonathan Ashmore (University College London, United
for Heart and Lung Research, Germany), Shannon           Kingdom), Laura Attardi (Stanford University), Tayna
Stevenson (University of Minnesota, Duluth), Nancy         Awabdy (University of California, San Francisco), Jeffrey
Toffolo (University of Florida), Jean-Paul Vincent (The         Axelrod (Stanford University Medical Center), Peter Baker
Francis Crick Institute, United Kingdom), John Wallingford     (deceased), David Baldwin (Stanford University), Michael
(University of Texas, Austin), Neal Williams (University       Banda (University of California, San Francisco), Cornelia
of California, Davis).                                 Bargmann (The Rockefeller University), Ben Barres
Chapter 22: Major contributor Yukiko Yamashita              (Stanford University), David Bartel (Massachusetts Institute
(Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of                of Technology), Konrad Basler (University of Zurich,
Technology). Stefano Biressi (University of Trento, Italy),       Switzerland), Wolfgang Baumeister (Max Planck Institute of
Steven Clark (University of Michigan), Elizabeth Good         Biochemistry, Germany), Michael Bennett (Albert Einstein
(University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Konrad           College of Medicine), Darwin Berg (University of California,
Hocheldinger (Harvard University), Shagun Khera           San Diego), Anton Berns (Netherlands Cancer Institute, The
(University of Plymouth, United Kingdom), Carien Niessen     Netherlands), Bradley E. Bernstein (Harvard Medical
(University of Cologne, Germany), Jenean O’Brien (The        School), Merton Bernfield (Harvard Medical School),
College of St. Scholastica), Peter Reddien (Massachusetts      Michael Berridge (The Babraham Institute, United
Institute of Technology), Edward Seto (George Washington    Kingdom), Wendy Bickmore (MRC Human Genetics Unit,
University), Arianna Smith (Kenyon College), Elly Tanaka      United Kingdom), Walter Birchmeier (Max Delbrück Center
(Imperial College London, United Kingdom)                    for Molecular Medicine, Germany), Adrian Bird (Wellcome
Chapter 23: Major contributor Matthew Welch (University     Trust Centre, United Kingdom), David Birk (UMDNJ—
of California, Berkeley). Steven Clark (University of           Robert Wood Johnson Medical School), Michael Bishop
Michigan), Ding Jeak Ling (National University of              (University of California, San Francisco), Trever Bivona
Singapore, Singapore), Stefan Fischer (Deggendorf             (University of California, San Francisco), Elizabeth
Institute of Technology, Germany), Elizabeth Good           Blackburn (University of California, San Francisco), Tim
(University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Karen               Bliss (National Institute for Medical Research, United
Guillemin (University of Oregon), Julian Guttman (Simon     Kingdom), Hans Bode (University of California, Irvine), Piet
Fraser University, Canada), Jenean O’Brien (The College       Borst (Jan Swammerdam Institute, University of

=== Original PDF page 18 ===
                                                           Acknowledgments    xvii


Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Henry Bourne (University of    United Kingdom), Chris Doe (University of Oregon,
California, San Francisco), Alan Boyde (University College     Eugene), Russell Doolittle (University of California, San
London, United Kingdom), Donita Brady (Duke University),    Diego), W. Ford Doolittle (Dalhousie University, Canada),
Martin Brand (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom),      Julian Downward (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom),
Carl Branden (deceased), Andre Brandli (Swiss Federal      Uwe Drescher (King’s College London, United Kingdom),
Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland), Dennis Bray      Keith Dudley (King’s College London, United Kingdom),
(University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), Mark          Graham Dunn (MRC Cell Biophysics Unit, United
Bretscher (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United      Kingdom), Jim Dunwell (John Innes Institute, United
Kingdom), Douglas J. Briant (University of Victoria,           Kingdom), Susan K. Dutcher (Washington University in
Canada), Jason Brickner (Northwestern University), James       St. Louis), Richard H. Ebright (Rutgers University), Bruce
Briscoe (National Institute for Medical Research, United       Edgar (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center), Paul
Kingdom), Neil Brockdorff (University of Oxford, United      Edwards (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom),
Kingdom), Marianne Bronner-Fraser (California Institute of    Robert Edwards (University of California, San Francisco),
Technology), Robert Brooks (King’s College London, United   David Eisenberg (University of California, Los Angeles),
Kingdom), Barry Brown (King’s College London, United       Sarah Elgin (Washington University in St. Louis), Ruth
Kingdom), Donald Brown (Carnegie Institution for Science,    Ellman (Institute of Cancer Research, United Kingdom),
Baltimore), Michael Brown (University of Oxford, United      Michael Elowitz (California Institute of Technology), Hana
Kingdom), Michael Bulger (University of Rochester Medical    El-Samad (University of California, San Francisco), Beverly
Center), Fred Bunz (Johns Hopkins University), Steve        Emerson (The Salk Institute), Charles Emerson (University
Burden (New York University School of Medicine), Max         of Virginia), Scott D. Emr (Cornell University), Sharyn
Burger (University of Basel, Switzerland), Stephen Burley     Endow (Duke University), Amber English (University of
(SGX Pharmaceuticals), Briana Burton (Harvard             Colorado at Boulder), Lynn Enquist (Princeton University),
University), Keith Burridge (University of North Carolina,       Tariq Enver (Institute of Cancer Research, United
Chapel Hill), John Cairns (Radcliffe Infirmary, United         Kingdom), David Epel (Stanford University), Ralf Erdmann
Kingdom), Patricia Calarco (University of California, San       (Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany), Gerard Evan
Francisco), Zacheus Cande (University of California,            (University of California, Comprehensive Cancer Center),
Berkeley), Lewis Cantley (Harvard Medical School), Charles   Ray Evert (University of Wisconsin, Madison), Matthias Falk
Cantor (Columbia University), Roderick Capaldi (University    (Lehigh University), Stanley Falkow (Stanford University),
of Oregon), Mario Capecchi (University of Utah), Michael      Douglas Fearon (University of Cambridge, United
Carey (University of California, Los Angeles), Adelaide        Kingdom), Gary Felsenfeld (National Institutes of Health),
Carpenter (University of California, San Diego), John           Stuart Ferguson (University of Oxford, United Kingdom),
Carroll (University College London, United Kingdom), Tom    James Ferrell (Stanford University), Christine Field
Cavalier-Smith (King’s College London, United Kingdom),     (Harvard Medical School), Daniel Finley (Harvard
Pierre Chambon (University of Strasbourg, France), Moses      University), Gary Firestone (University of California,
Chao (New York University School of Medicine), Venice        Berkeley), Gerald Fischbach (Columbia University),
Chiueh (University of California, Berkeley), Hans Clevers      Gordon Fishell (New York University School of Medicine),
(Hubrecht Institute, The Netherlands), Enrico Coen (John      Robert Fletterick (University of California, San Francisco),
Innes Institute, United Kingdom), Philip Cohen (University    Harvey Florman (Tufts University), Judah Folkman
of Dundee, United Kingdom), Robert Cohen (University of     (Harvard Medical School), Larry Fowke (University of
California, San Francisco), Stephen Cohen (EMBL            Saskatchewan, Canada), Velia Fowler (The Scripps Research
Heidelberg, Germany), Roger Cooke (University of               Institute), Thomas D. Fox (Cornell University), Jennifer
California, San Francisco), Steven Cook (Imperial College      Frazier (Exploratorium, San Francisco), Matthew Freeman
London, United Kingdom), John Cooper (Washington         (Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom), Daniel
University School of Medicine, St. Louis), Julie P. Cooper       Friend (University of California, San Francisco), Elaine
(National Cancer Institute), John Couchman (University of     Fuchs (University of Chicago), Joseph Gall (Carnegie
Copenhagen, Denmark), Jose A. Costoya (Universidade de      Institution of Washington), Richard Gardner (University of
Santiago de Compostela, Spain), Michael Cox (University of    Oxford, United Kingdom), Anthony Gardner-Medwin
Wisconsin, Madison), Nancy Craig (Johns Hopkins             (University College London, United Kingdom), Peter
University), Emily D. Crawford (University of California, San    Garland (Institute of Cancer Research, United Kingdom),
Francisco), James Crow (University of Wisconsin, Madison),   David Garrod (University of Manchester, United Kingdom),
Stuart Cull-Candy (University College London, United        Susan M. Gasser (University of Basel, Switzerland), Walter
Kingdom), Leslie Dale (University College London, United     Gehring (Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland),
Kingdom), Caroline Damsky (University of California, San     Benny Geiger (Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Francisco), Graeme Davis (University of California, San          Israel), Vladimir Gelfand (Northwestern University), Larry
Francisco), Caroline Dean (John Innes Centre, United         Gerace (The Scripps Research Institute), Holger Gerhardt
Kingdom), Johann De Bono (The Institute of Cancer          (London Research Institute, United Kingdom), John
Research, United Kingdom), Anthony DeFranco (University    Gerhart (University of California, Berkeley), Günther
of California, San Francisco), Abby Dernburg (University of    Gerisch (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany),
California, Berkeley), Johan de Rooij (The Hubrecht           Frank Gertler (Massachusetts Institute of Technology),
Institute, The Netherlands), Arshad Desai (University of       Sankar Ghosh (Yale University School of Medicine), Alfred
California, San Diego), Michael Dexter (The Wellcome        Gilman (The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Trust, United Kingdom), John Dick (University of Toronto,      Center), Andrew P. Gilmore (University of Manchester,
Canada), Christopher Dobson (University of Cambridge,      United Kingdom), Reid Gilmore (University of

=== Original PDF page 19 ===
xviii   Acknowledgments


Massachusetts, Amherst), Bernie Gilula (deceased), Charles    (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Joe Howard (Max
Gilvarg (Princeton University), Benjamin S. Glick             Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
(University of Chicago), Michael Glotzer (University of        Germany), Jonathan Howard (University of Washington),
Chicago), Robert Goldman (Northwestern University),        James Hudspeth (The Rockefeller University), Simon
Larry Goldstein (University of California, San Diego),         Hughes (King’s College London, United Kingdom), Martin
Bastien Gomperts (University College Hospital Medical       Humphries (University of Manchester, United Kingdom),
School, United Kingdom), Daniel Goodenough (Harvard     Tim Hunt (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Neil
Medical School), Jim Goodrich (University of Colorado,       Hunter (University of California, Davis), Laurence Hurst
Boulder), Jeffrey Gordon (Washington University in St.          (University of Bath, United Kingdom), Quyen Huynh
Louis), Peter Gould (Middlesex Hospital Medical School,       (University of Toronto, Canada), Jeremy Hyams (University
United Kingdom), Alan Grafen (University of Oxford,          College London, United Kingdom), Tony Hyman (Max
United Kingdom), Walter Gratzer (King’s College London,     Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
United Kingdom), Michael Gray (Dalhousie University,       Germany), Richard Hynes (Massachusetts Institute of
Canada), Douglas Green (St. Jude Children’s Hospital),        Technology), Philip Ingham (University of Sheffield, United
Howard Green (Harvard University), Michael R. Green        Kingdom), Kenneth Irvine (Rutgers University), Robin
(University of Massachusetts Medical School), Shiv Grewal     Irvine (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), Norman
(National Cancer Institute), Leslie Grivell (University of        Iscove (Ontario Cancer Institute, Canada), David Ish-
Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Carol Gross (University of      Horowicz (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Rudolf
California, San Francisco), Frank Grosveld (Erasmus           Jaenisch (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Reinhard
Universiteit, The Netherlands), Michael Grunstein            Jahn (Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
(University of California, Los Angeles), Barry Gumbiner       Germany), Lily Jan (University of California, San Francisco),
(Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center), Brian Gunning     Charles Janeway, Jr. (deceased), Tom Jessell (Columbia
(Australian National University, Australia), Christine            University), Arthur Johnson (Texas A&M University), Louise
Guthrie (University of California, San Francisco), James       Johnson (deceased), Andy Johnston (John Innes Institute,
Haber (Brandeis University), Ernst Hafen (University of        United Kingdom), Laura Johnston (Columbia University),
Zurich, Switzerland), David Haig (Harvard University),         E.G. Jordan (Queen Elizabeth College, United Kingdom),
Andrew Halestrap (University of Bristol, United Kingdom),    Ron Kaback (University of California, Los Angeles), Michael
Alan Hall (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center), Jeffrey    Karin (University of California, San Diego), Gary Karpen
Hall (Brandeis University), John Hall (University of             (University of California, Berkeley), Eric Karsenti (European
Southampton, United Kingdom), Zach Hall (University of      Molecular Biology Laboratory, Germany), David Kashatus
California, San Francisco), Douglas Hanahan (University of     (University of Virginia), Stefan Kanzok (Loyola University
California, San Francisco), David Hanke (University of         Chicago) Ken Keegstra (Michigan State University), Doug
Cambridge, United Kingdom), Gregory Hannon (Cold         Kellogg (University of California, Santa Cruz), Ray Keller
Spring Harbor Laboratory), Nicholas Harberd (University of    (University of California, Berkeley), Douglas Kellogg
Oxford, United Kingdom), Graham Hardie (University of        (University of California, Santa Cruz), Regis Kelly (University
Dundee, United Kingdom), Richard Harland (University of      of California, San Francisco), John Kendrick-Jones (MRC
California, Berkeley), Adrian Harris (Cancer Research UK,      Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom), Cynthia
United Kingdom), John Harris (University of Otago, New      Kenyon (University of California, San Francisco), Roger
Zealand), Tony Harris (University of Toronto, Canada),        Keynes (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), Judith
Stephen Harrison (Harvard University), F. Ulrich Hartl (Max    Kimble (University of Wisconsin, Madison), David
Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany), Leland         Kimelman (University of Washington), David Kingsley
Hartwell (University of Washington), Adrian Harwood          (Stanford University), Robert Kingston (Massachusetts
(MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Cell          General Hospital), Marc Kirschner (Harvard University),
Biology Unit, United Kingdom), Scott Hawley (Stowers         Richard Klausner (National Institutes of Health), Nancy
Institute for Medical Research), John Heath (University of      Kleckner (Harvard University), Mike Klymkowsky
Birmingham, United Kingdom), Ramanujan Hegde             (University of Colorado, Boulder), Kelly Komachi
(National Institutes of Health), Gunnar von Heijne              (University of California, San Francisco), Rachel Kooistra
(Stockholm University, Sweden), Carl-Henrik Heldin          (Loyola University Chicago), Eugene Koonin (National
(Uppsala University, Sweden), Ari Helenius (Swiss Federal      Institutes of Health), Juan Korenbrot (University of
Institute of Technology, Switzerland), Richard Henderson       California, San Francisco), Roger Kornberg (Stanford
(MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United Kingdom),      University), Tom Kornberg (University of California, San
Glenn Herrick (University of Utah), Ira Herskowitz             Francisco), Stuart Kornfeld (Washington University in St.
(deceased), Martin W. Hetzer (The Salk Institute), Bertil         Louis), Daniel Koshland (University of California, Berkeley),
Hille (University of Washington), Lindsay Hinck (University    Douglas Koshland (Carnegie Institution of Washington,
of California, Santa Cruz), Alan Hinnebusch (National          Baltimore), Marilyn Kozak (University of Pittsburgh), Maria
Institutes of Health), Brigid Hogan (Duke University),          Krasilnikova (Pennsylvania State University), Mark Krasnow
Nancy Hollingsworth (State University of New York, Stony      (Stanford University), Arnold Kriegstein (University of
Brook), Frank Holstege (University Medical Center, The         California, San Francisco), Werner Kühlbrandt (Max Planck
Netherlands), Leroy Hood (Institute for Systems Biology),       Institute for Biophysics, Germany), John Kuriyan
Karen Hopkin, John Hopfield (Princeton University),           (University of California, Berkeley), Robert Kypta (MRC
Robert Horvitz (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Art    Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, United Kingdom),
Horwich (Yale University School of Medicine), Alan Rick      Karim Labib (University of Manchester, United Kingdom),
Horwitz (University of Virginia), David Housman              Peter Lachmann (MRC Centre, United Kingdom), Ulrich

=== Original PDF page 20 ===
                                                            Acknowledgments   xix


Laemmli (University of Geneva, Switzerland), Trevor Lamb     (University College London, United Kingdom), N.A.
(University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), Hartmut         Mitchison (University College London, United Kingdom),
Land (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), David         Timothy Mitchison (Harvard Medical School), Quinn
Lane (University of Dundee, United Kingdom), Jane           Mitrovich (University of California, San Francisco), Marek
Langdale (University of Oxford, United Kingdom), Lewis       Mlodzik (Mount Sinai Hospital, New York), Alex Mogilner
Lanier (University of California, San Francisco), Nils-Göran     (University of California, Davis), Peter Mombaerts (The
Larsson (Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging,             Rockefeller University), Mark Mooseker (Yale University),
Germany), Jay Lash (University of Pennsylvania), Peter        David Morgan (University of California, San Francisco),
Lawrence (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, United      Michelle Moritz (University of California, San Francisco),
Kingdom), Paul Lazarow (Mount Sinai School of Medicine),    Richard Morris (John Innes Centre, United Kingdom),
Jeannie Lee (Harvard Medical School), Robert J. Lefkowitz     Montrose Moses (Duke University), Keith Mostov
(Duke University), Michael Levine (University of California,     (University of California, San Francisco), Anne Mudge
Berkeley), Warren Levinson (University of California, San       (University College London, United Kingdom), Hans
Francisco), Alex Levitzki (Hebrew University, Israel), Wes      Müller-Eberhard (Scripps Clinic and Research Institute),
Lewis (University of Alabama), Ottoline Leyser (University     Annette Müller-Taubenberger (Ludwig Maximilians
of York, United Kingdom), Joachim Li (University of             University, Germany), Alan Munro (University of
California, San Francisco), Jeffrey Lichtman (Harvard         Cambridge, United Kingdom), J. Murdoch Mitchison
University), H. Lill (VU University Amsterdam, The            (Harvard University), Richard Myers (Stanford University),
Netherlands), Tomas Lindahl (Cancer Research UK, United    Diana Myles (University of California, Davis), Andrew
Kingdom), Vishu Lingappa (University of California, San      Murray (Harvard University), Maxence Nachury (Stanford
Francisco), Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz (National            School of Medicine), Shigekazu Nagata (Kyoto University,
Institutes of Health), Joseph Lipsick (Stanford University        Japan), Eric Nam (University of Toronto, Canada), Geeta
School of Medicine), Dan Littman (New York University        Narlikar (University of California, San Francisco), Kim
School of Medicine), Clive Lloyd (John Innes Institute,        Nasmyth (University of Oxford, United Kingdom), Mark E.
United Kingdom), Richard Locksley (University of            Nelson (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Michael
California, San Francisco), Richard Losick (Harvard           Neuberger (deceased), Walter Neupert (University of
University), Daniel Louvard (Institut Curie, France), Robin     Munich, Germany), David Nicholls (University of Dundee,
Lovell-Badge (National Institute for Medical Research,        United Kingdom), Roger Nicoll (University of California,
United Kingdom), Scott Lowe (Cold Spring Harbor           San Francisco), Poul Nissen (Aarhus University, Denmark),
Laboratory), Shirley Lowe (University of California, San       Suzanne Noble (University of California, San Francisco),
Francisco), Reinhard Lührman (Max Planck Institute of       Eva Nogales (University of California, Berkeley), Harry
Biophysical Chemistry, Germany), Michael Lynch (Indiana     Noller (University of California, Santa Cruz), Peter Novick
University), Laura Machesky (University of Birmingham,        (University of California, San Diego), Susan Ferro-Novick
United Kingdom), Hiten Madhani (University of California,     (University of California, San Diego), Jodi Nunnari (University
San Francisco), James Maller (University of Colorado           of California, Davis), Paul Nurse (The Francis Crick
Medical School), Tom Maniatis (Harvard University),            Institute, United Kingdom), Roel Nusse (Stanford
Richard Mann (Columbia University), Colin Manoil             University), Michael Nussenzweig (The Rockefeller
(Harvard Medical School), Elliott Margulies (National           University), Duncan O’Dell (deceased), Duncan Odom
Institutes of Health), Philippa Marrack (National Jewish       (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Patrick O’Farrell
Medical and Research Center, Denver), Mark Marsh            (University of California, San Francisco), Bjorn Olsen
(Institute of Cancer Research, United Kingdom), Wallace      (Harvard Medical School), Maynard Olson (University of
Marshall (University of California, San Francisco), Gail        Washington), Stuart Orkin (Harvard University), Terry Orr-
Martin (University of California, San Francisco), Paul         Weaver (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Erin
Martin (University College London, United Kingdom), Joan    O’Shea (Harvard University), Dieter Osterhelt (Max Planck
Massagué (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center),           Institute of Biochemistry, Germany), William Otto (Cancer
Christopher Mathews (Oregon State University), Satyajit       Research UK, United Kingdom), John Owen (University of
Mayor (National Centre for Biological Sciences, India),        Birmingham, United Kingdom), Dale Oxender (University
Brian McCarthy (University of California, Irvine), Richard       of Michigan), George Palade (deceased), Albert Pan
McCarty (Cornell University), Melanie McGill (University of    (Georgia Regents University), Duojia Pan (Johns Hopkins
Toronto, Canada), William McGinnis (University of           Medical School), Barbara Panning (University of California,
California, San Diego), Anne McLaren (Wellcome/Cancer     San Francisco), Roy Parker (University of Arizona, Tucson),
Research Campaign Institute, United Kingdom), Frank        William W. Parson (University of Washington), Terence
McNally (University of California, Davis), James A. McNew     Partridge (MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, United Kingdom),
(Rice University), J. Richard McIntosh (University of           William E. Paul (National Institutes of Health), Tony
Colorado, Boulder), Andy McMahon (University of          Pawson (deceased), Hugh Pelham (Medical Research
Southern California), Frederick Meins (Friedrich Miescher     Council, United Kingdom), Robert Perry (Institute for
Institute, Switzerland), Stephanie Mel (University of          Cancer Research, Philadelphia), Gordon Peters (Cancer
California, San Diego), Ira Mellman (Genentech), Doug       Research UK, United Kingdom), Greg Petsko (Brandeis
Melton (Harvard University), Barbara Meyer (University of      University), Nikolaus Pfanner (University of Freiburg,
California, Berkeley), Elliot Meyerowitz (California Institute    Germany), David Phillips (The Rockefeller University),
of Technology), Chris Miller (Brandeis University), Robert     Jeremy Pickett-Heaps (The University of Melbourne,
Mishell (University of Birmingham, United Kingdom), Tom     Australia), Jonathan Pines (The Gurdon Institute, United
Misteli (National Cancer Institute), Avrion Mitchison         Kingdom), Julie Pitcher (University College London, United

=== Original PDF page 21 ===
xx   Acknowledgments


Kingdom), Jeffrey Pollard (Albert Einstein College of          John Scott (University of Manchester, United Kingdom),
Medicine), Tom Pollard (Yale University), Bruce Ponder       John Sedat (University of California, San Francisco), Peter
(University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), Prasanth         Selby (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Zvi Sellinger
Potluri (The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research     (Hebrew University, Israel), Gregg Semenza (Johns Hopkins
Institute), Daniel Portnoy (University of California,              University), John Senderak (Jefferson Medical College),
Berkeley), Olivier Pourquie (Harvard Medical School),         Philippe Sengel (University of Grenoble, France), Peter
James Priess (University of Washington), Darwin Prockop     Shaw (John Innes Institute, United Kingdom), Michael
(Tulane University), Andreas Prokop (University of            Sheetz (Columbia University), Morgan Sheng
Manchester, United Kingdom), Mark Ptashne (Memorial       (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Charles Sherr
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center), Dale Purves (Duke                (St. Jude Children’s Hospital), David Shima (Cancer
University), Efraim Racker (Cornell University), Jordan Raff    Research UK, United Kingdom), Marc Shuman (University
(University of Oxford, United Kingdom), Klaus Rajewsky        of California, San Francisco), David Sibley (Washington
(Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Germany),      University in St. Louis), Samuel Silverstein (Columbia
George Ratcliffe (University of Oxford, United Kingdom),       University), Melvin I. Simon (California Institute of
Elio Raviola (Harvard Medical School), Erez Raz (University    Technology), Kai Simons (Max Planck Institute of Molecular
of Münster, Germany), Martin Rechsteiner (University of        Cell Biology and Genetics, Germany), Phillipa Simons
Utah, Salt Lake City), Samara Reck-Peterson (Harvard          (Imperial College, United Kingdom), Robert H. Singer
Medical School), David Rees (National Institute for Medical     (Albert Einstein School of Medicine), Jonathan Slack
Research, United Kingdom), Thomas A. Reh (University of     (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Stephen Small
Washington), Peter Rehling (University of Göttingen,        (New York University), Alison Smith (John Innes Institute,
Germany), Louis Reichardt (University of California, San       United Kingdom), Austin Smith (University of Edinburgh,
Francisco), Renee Reijo (University of California, San          United Kingdom), Jim Smith (The Gurdon Institute, United
Francisco), Caetano Reis e Sousa (Cancer Research UK,       Kingdom), John Maynard Smith (University of Sussex,
United Kingdom), Fred Richards (Yale University), Conly      United Kingdom), Mitchell Sogin (Woods Hole
Rieder (Wadsworth Center, Albany), Phillips Robbins         Oceanographic Institution), Frank Solomon (Massachusetts
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Elizabeth              Institute of Technology), Michael Solursh (University of
Robertson (The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human             Iowa), Bruce Spiegelman (Harvard Medical School),
Genetics, United Kingdom), Elaine Robson (University of      Timothy Springer (Harvard Medical School), Mathias
Reading, United Kingdom), Robert Roeder (The Rockefeller     Sprinzl (University of Bayreuth, Germany), Scott Stachel
University), Michael Rout (The Rockefeller University), Joel     (University of California, Berkeley), Andrew Staehelin
Rosenbaum (Yale University), Janet Rossant (Mount Sinai       (University of Colorado, Boulder), David Standring (University
Hospital, Canada), Jesse Roth (National Institutes of             of California, San Francisco), Margaret Stanley (University of
Health), Jim Rothman (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer      Cambridge, United Kingdom), Martha Stark (University of
Center), Rodney Rothstein (Columbia University), Erkki         California, San Francisco), Wilfred Stein (Hebrew University,
Ruoslahti (La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation), Chris          Israel), Malcolm Steinberg (Princeton University), Ralph
Rushlow (New York University), Gary Ruvkun               Steinman (deceased), Len Stephens (The Babraham
(Massachusetts General Hospital), Vladislav Ryvkin (Stony      Institute, United Kingdom), Paul Sternberg (California
Brook University), David Sabatini (New York University),        Institute of Technology), Rolf Sternglanz (Stony Brook
Alan Sachs (University of California, Berkeley), Edward         University), Chuck Stevens (The Salk Institute), Alastair
Salmon (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill), Laasya     Stewart (The Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute,
Samhita (Indian Institute of Science, India), Aziz Sancar         Australia), Murray Stewart (MRC Laboratory of Molecular
(University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill), Joshua Sanes       Biology, United Kingdom), Bruce Stillman (Cold Spring
(Harvard University), Peter Sarnow (Stanford University),      Harbor Laboratory), Mike Stratton (Wellcome Trust Sanger
Lisa Satterwhite (Duke University Medical School), Robert      Institute, United Kingdom), Charles Streuli (University of
Sauer (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Ken Sawin      Manchester, United Kingdom), Monroe Strickberger
(The Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, United            (University of Missouri, St. Louis), Daniela Stock (The Victor
Kingdom), Howard Schachman (University of California,     Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Australia), Charles
Berkeley), Gerald Schatten (Pittsburgh Development            Streuli (University of Manchester, United Kingdom), Robert
Center), Gottfried Schatz (Biozentrum, University of Basel,     Stroud (University of California, San Francisco), Kevin
Switzerland), Randy Schekman (University of California,       Struhl (Harvard Medical School), Michael Stryker
Berkeley), Richard Scheller (Stanford University), Stephen      (University of California, San Francisco), Suresh Subramani
Scherer (University of Toronto, Canada), Giampietro            (University of California, San Diego), William Sullivan
Schiavo (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Ueli          (University of California, Santa Cruz), Azim Surani (The
Schibler (University of Geneva, Switzerland), Alex Schier      Gurdon Institute, United Kingdom), Jesper Svejstrup
(Harvard University), Joseph Schlessinger (New York          (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Karel Svoboda
University Medical Center), Danny J. Schnell (University of    (Howard Hughes Medical Institute), Daniel Szollosi
Massachusetts, Amherst), Sandra Schmid (University of         (Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, France),
Texas Southwestern), Michael Schramm (Hebrew              Jack Szostak (Harvard Medical School), Clifford Tabin
University, Israel), Robert Schreiber (Washington University    (Harvard Medical School), Masatoshi Takeichi (RIKEN
School of Medicine), Sebastian Schuck (University of          Center for Developmental Biology, Japan), Robert Tampé
Heidelberg, Germany), James Schwartz (Columbia           (Goethe University, Germany), Nicolas Tapon (London
University), Ronald Schwartz (National Institutes of           Research Institute, United Kingdom), Diethard Tautz
Health), François Schweisguth (Institut Pasteur, France),       (University of Cologne, Germany), Marc Tessier-Lavigne

=== Original PDF page 22 ===
                                                            Acknowledgments   xxi


(The Rockefeller University), Julie Theriot (Stanford             Berkeley), William Wickner (Dartmouth College), Carrie
University), Roger Thomas (University of Bristol, United       Wilczewski (Loyola University Chicago), Michael Wilcox
Kingdom), Barry Thompson (Cancer Research UK, United      (deceased), Lewis T. Williams (Chiron Corporation), Patrick
Kingdom), Craig Thompson (Memorial Sloan Kettering        Williamson (University of Massachusetts, Amherst), Keith
Cancer Center), Kurt Thorn (University of California, San       Willison (Chester Beatty Laboratories, United Kingdom),
Francisco), Janet Thornton (European Bioinformatics         John Wilson (Baylor College of Medicine), Anna Wing
Institute, United Kingdom), Vernon Thornton (King’s          (Pennsylvania State University), Douglas J. Winton (Cancer
College London, United Kingdom), Cheryll Tickle             Research UK, United Kingdom), Alan Wolffe (deceased),
(University of Dundee, United Kingdom), Jim Till (Ontario     Richard Wolfenden (University of North Carolina, Chapel
Cancer Institute, Canada), Lewis Tilney (University of             Hill), Sandra Wolin (Yale University School of Medicine),
Pennsylvania), David Tollervey (University of Edinburgh,      Lewis Wolpert (University College London, United
United Kingdom), Ian Tomlinson (Cancer Research United    Kingdom), Richard D. Wood (University of Pittsburgh
Kingdom), Nick Tonks (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory),      Cancer Institute), Chris L. Woodcock (University of
Alain Townsend (Institute of Molecular Medicine, John        Massachusetts, Amherst), Ian Woods (Ithaca College),
Radcliffe Hospital, United Kingdom), Paul Travers (Scottish   Abraham Worcel (University of Rochester), John Wright
Institute for Regeneration Medicine, United Kingdom),         (University of Alabama), Nick Wright (Cancer Research UK,
Robert Trelstad (UMDNJ—Robert Wood Johnson Medical     United Kingdom), John Wyke (Beatson Institute for Cancer
School), Anthony Trewavas (Edinburgh University, United     Research, United Kingdom), Johanna Wysocka and lab
Kingdom), Nigel Unwin (MRC Laboratory of Molecular       members (Stanford School of Medicine), Michael P. Yaffe
Biology, United Kingdom), Victor Vacquier (University of       (California Institute for Regenerative Medicine), Kenneth
California, San Diego), Ronald D. Vale (University of         M. Yamada (National Institutes of Health), Keith Yamamoto
California, San Francisco), Richard B. Vallee (Columbia         (University of California, San Francisco), Shinya Yamanaka
University), Tom Vanaman (University of Kentucky), Harry     (Kyoto University, Japan), Alpha Yap (The University of
van der Westen (Wageningen, The Netherlands), Harold       Queensland, Australia), Charles Yocum (University of
Varmus (National Cancer Institute), Alexander J. Varshavsky    Michigan, Ann Arbor), Peter Yurchenco (UMDNJ—
(California Institute of Technology), Danielle Vidaurre         Robert Wood Johnson Medical School), Rosalind Zalin
(University of Toronto, Canada), Anna Constance Vind         (University College London, United Kingdom), Patricia
(University of Copenhagen, Denmark), Gia Voeltz (University   Zambryski (University of California, Berkeley), Marino
of Colorado, Boulder), Donald Voet (University of               Zerial (Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and
Pennsylvania), Harald von Boehmer (Harvard Medical         Genetics, Germany).
School), Amy Wagers (Harvard University), Madhu Wahi
(University of California, San Francisco), Virginia Walbot
                               OUR PUBLISHER(Stanford University), Frank Walsh (GlaxoSmithKline,
United Kingdom), D. Eric Walters (Chicago Medical        We thank the dozens of people whose dedication brought
School), Tobias Walther (Harvard University), Trevor Wang                                                                   this project to fruition. Special thanks go to our editor,
(John Innes Institute, United Kingdom), Xiaodong Wang                                                         Betsy Twitchell, whose talents and personality kept every-
(The University of Texas Southwestern Medical School),                                                 one focused. As for previous editions, Denise Schanck
Yu-Lie Wang (Worcester Foundation for Biomedical
                                                            directed  operations,  displaying  unflagging  patience,Research), Gary Ward (University of Vermont), Anne
                                                                   insight, tact, and energy throughout the entire journey.Warner (University College London, United Kingdom),
                                              Once again, we are in debt to our talented artist, NigelCarmen Warren (University of California, Los Angeles),
Graham Warren (Yale University School of Medicine), Paul    Orme, who—with author Keith Roberts—produced the
Wassarman (Mount Sinai School of Medicine), Clare           captivating art and design that grace the covers, as well
Waterman-Storer (The Scripps Research Institute), Fiona       as the hundreds of distinctive, highly informative fig-
Watt (Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), John Watts      ures throughout the text. Carla Talmadge, our tireless
(John Innes Institute, United Kingdom), Michael Way          project editor, juggled the many moving parts of this text-
(Cancer Research UK, United Kingdom), Klaus Weber (Max   book and ushered it gracefully into the book you hold in
Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Germany),        your hands today. In addition, we are immensely grateful
Martin Weigert (Institute for Cancer Research,                 to our copyeditor, Christopher Curioli, who carefully read
Philadelphia), Robert Weinberg (Massachusetts Institute of                                                         every page. We also thank Danny Vargo, our assistant edi-
Technology), Orion Weiner (University of California, San                                                                 tor who tracked the countless emails, chapter drafts, and
Francisco), Harold Weintraub (deceased), Karsten Weis                                                          Excel files that constantly zipped back and forth between
(Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland), Irving
                                                                  editors, authors, and reviewers. And production managerWeissman (Stanford University), Jonathan Weissman
                                                        Jane Searle adeptly managed the process of translating our(University of California, San Francisco), Matthew Welch
                                                   raw material into the polished final product.(University of California, Berkeley), Steve Wellard
(Pennsylvania State University), Jim Wells (University of        An absolutely tireless team at Norton created the print
California, San Francisco), Susan R. Wente (Vanderbilt       and digital supplementary resources for our book. Media
University School of Medicine), Norman Wessells              editor Todd Pearson, associate editor Jasmine Ribeaux, and
(University of Oregon, Eugene), Stephen West (Cancer        media assistant editor Lindsey Heale worked on every ele-
Research UK, United Kingdom), Judy White (University of     ment of the package as a team. Chris Rapp’s dedicated and
Virginia), Evan Whitehead (University of California,           focused efforts on the Smartwork course have produced an

=== Original PDF page 23 ===
xxii   Acknowledgments


invaluable resource for students and instructors. Megan    the hands of as many instructors and students as possi-
Schindel, Patricia Wong, and Tommy Persano handled the    ble. We thank her and everyone involved in Norton’s sales,
permissions for this edition, and Kim Yi’s media project    marketing, and management teams for their unflagging
editorial group, specifically Jesse Newkirk, skillfully shep-    support of our book, including Erik Fahlgren, Michael
herded the content through its many stages of development.    Wright, Ann Shin, and Julia Reidhead.
   Marketing manager Ruth Bolster’s expertise in direct
marketing has helped ensure that this book makes it into

=== Original PDF page 24 ===
                                                                                                                                         xxiii


Brief Contents




PART I         INTRODUCTION TO THE CELL
Chapter 1          Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life                                           1
Chapter 2          Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics                                                49
Chapter 3         Proteins                                                                   115
PART II        BASIC GENETIC MECHANISMS
Chapter 4       DNA, Chromosomes, and Genomes                                             183
Chapter 5      DNA Replication, Repair, and Recombination                                     253
Chapter 6      How Cells Read the Genome: From DNA to Protein                                321
Chapter 7         Control of Gene Expression                                                   397
PART III       WAYS OF WORKING WITH CELLS
Chapter 8         Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems                                         475
Chapter 9          Visualizing Cells and Their Molecules                                            563
PART IV        INTERNAL ORGANIZATION OF THE CELL
Chapter 10      Membrane Structure                                                         603
Chapter 11       Small-Molecule Transport and Electrical Properties of Membranes                     637
Chapter 12         Intracellular Organization and Protein Sorting                                     683
Chapter 13         Intracellular Membrane Traffic                                                  749
Chapter 14       Energy Conversion and Metabolic Compartmentation: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts     811
Chapter 15        Cell Signaling                                                              873
Chapter 16      The Cytoskeleton                                                           949
Chapter 17      The Cell Cycle                                                             1027
Chapter 18        Cell Death                                                                1089
PART V        CELLS IN THEIR SOCIAL CONTEXT
Chapter 19        Cell Junctions and the Extracellular Matrix                                       1105
Chapter 20       Cancer                                                                   1163
Chapter 21       Development of Multicellular Organisms                                        1217
Chapter 22      Stem Cells in Tissue Homeostasis and Regeneration                              1279
Chapter 23       Pathogens and Infection                                                     1313
Chapter 24      The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems                                      1353

=== Original PDF page 25 ===
xxiv


Special Features




TABLE 1–2   Some Model Organisms and Their Genomes                                                     29
TABLE 2–1    Covalent and Noncovalent Chemical Bonds                                                      51
TABLE 2–2    Relationship Between the Standard Free-Energy Change, △G°, and the Equilibrium Constant                69
PANEL 2–1   Chemical Bonds and Groups Commonly Encountered in Biological Molecules                            94
PANEL 2–2   Water and Its Influence on the Behavior of Biological Molecules                                       96
PANEL 2–3   The Principal Types of Weak Noncovalent Bonds That Hold Macromolecules Together                     98
PANEL 2–4   An Outline of Some of the Types of Sugars Commonly Found in Cells                                 100
PANEL 2–5    Fatty Acids and Other Lipids                                                                 102
PANEL 2–6   A Survey of the Nucleotides                                                                 104
PANEL 2–7    Free Energy and Biological Reactions                                                          106
PANEL 2–8    Details of the 10 Steps of Glycolysis                                                           108
PANEL 2–9   The Complete Citric Acid Cycle                                                              110
PANEL 3–1   The 20 Amino Acids Found in Proteins                                                         118
TABLE 3–3    Macromolecular Machines Compared to Biomolecular Condensates and Membrane-enclosed Compartments  175
TABLE 3–4   Some Molecules Covalently Attached to Proteins That Regulate Protein Function                         175
TABLE 4–1   Some Vital Statistics for the Human Genome                                                    194
TABLE 5–4    Three Major Classes of Transposable Elements                                                  308
TABLE 6–1    Principal Types of RNAs Produced in Cells                                                      327
PANEL 7–1   Common Structural Motifs in Transcription Regulators                                             404
PANEL 8–1   Review of Classical Genetics                                                                520
PANEL 9–1    Protein Structure Determination Using CryoEM                                                   594
TABLE 11–1  A Comparison of Inorganic Ion Concentrations Inside and Outside a Typical Mammalian Cell                638
PANEL 11–1  The Derivation of the Nernst Equation                                                          656
TABLE 12–1   Relative Volumes Occupied by the Major Intracellular Compartments in a Liver Cell (Hepatocyte)             684
TABLE 14–1   Quantity of Organelles and Organelle DNA in Some Cells and Tissues                                 815
TABLE 14–2   Mitochondrial Functions                                                                    819
PANEL 14–1  Redox Potentials                                                                         825
TABLE 14–3   Product Yields from the Oxidation of Sugars and Fats                                             836
TABLE 15–3   Four Major Families of Heterotrimeric G Proteins                                                 907
TABLE 15–4  Some Extracellular Signal Proteins That Act Via RTKs                                              911
TABLE 15–5  The Ras Superfamily of Monomeric GTPases                                                    915
TABLE 15–6  Some Extracellular Signal Proteins That Act Through Cytokine Receptors and the JAK–STAT
               Signaling Pathway                                                                        925
PANEL 16–2  The Polymerization of Actin and Tubulin                                                        960
TABLE 16–1   Chemical Inhibitors of Actin and Microtubules                                                    964
PANEL 16–3   Actin Filaments                                                                           965
PANEL 16–4  Microtubules                                                                             994
TABLE 16–2   Major Types of Intermediate Filament Proteins in Vertebrate Cells                                    1007
TABLE 17–1  The Major Cyclins and Cdks of Vertebrates and Budding Yeast                                     1034
TABLE 17–2  Summary of the Major Cell-Cycle Regulatory Proteins                                            1041
PANEL 17–1  The Principal Stages of M Phase (Mitosis and Cytokinesis) in an Animal Cell                            1048
TABLE 19–1   Anchoring Junctions                                                                      1107
TABLE 19–2  Some Types of Collagen and Their Properties                                                   1134
TABLE 19–3  Some Types of Integrins                                                                   1149
TABLE 20–2   Viruses Associated with Human Cancers                                                      1202
TABLE 22–1  Blood Cells                                                                             1286
TABLE 23–1   Viruses That Cause Human Disease                                                          1323
TABLE 24–2   Properties of the Major Classes of Antibodies in Humans                                          1375
TABLE 24–3   Properties of Human Class I and Class II MHC Proteins                                           1388
TABLE 24–4  Some Vaccines Approved for Human Use                                                     1398

=== Original PDF page 26 ===
                                                                                             xxv


Contents




Chapter 1  Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life  1   The Expression Levels of All the Genes of an Organism
                                                           Can Be Determined                                   37
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH               2                                                                       Arabidopsis Has Been Chosen as a Model Plant                38
All Cells Store Their Hereditary Information in the Form of                                                             The World of Animal Cells Is Mainly Represented by a Worm,
    Double-Strand DNA Molecules                            2                                                                   a Fly, a Fish, a Mouse, and a Human                      38
All Cells Replicate Their Hereditary Information by Templated                                                                       Studies in the Fruit Fly Drosophila Provide a Key to Vertebrate
    Polymerization                                        3                                                                   Development                                        39
All Cells Transcribe Portions of Their DNA into RNA Molecules       5                                                             The Frog and the Zebrafish Provide Highly Accessible
All Cells Use Proteins as Catalysts                            6                                                                              Vertebrate Models                                    40
All Cells Translate RNA into Protein in the Same Way              6                                                             The Mouse Is the Predominant Mammalian Model Organism       41
Each Protein Is Encoded by a Specific Gene                     7                                                             The COVID-19 Pandemic Has Focused Scientists
Life Requires a Continual Input of Free Energy                   7                                                               on the SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus                         42
All Cells Function as Biochemical Factories                      8                                                       Humans Are Unique in Reporting on Their Own Peculiarities        44
All Cells Are Enclosed in a Plasma Membrane Across                                                                  To Understand Cells and Organisms Will Require Mathematics,
   Which Nutrients and Waste Materials Must Pass              8                                                                    Computers, and Quantitative Information                   44
Cells Operate at a Microscopic Scale Dominated by                                                        Summary                                              45
   Random Thermal Motion                                9                                                                Problems                                              46
A Living Cell Can Exist with 500 Genes                        10                                                                    References                                             47
Summary                                              10
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE          10
The Tree of Life Has Three Major Domains: Eukaryotes,              Chapter 2  Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics       49
    Bacteria, and Archaea                                 11                                                    THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF A CELL                  49
Eukaryotes Make Up the Domain of Life That Is Most                                                                 Water Is Held Together by Hydrogen Bonds                    50
    Familiar to Us                                        13                                                                   Four Types of Noncovalent Attractions Help Bring Molecules
On the Basis of Genome Analysis, Bacteria Are the Most                                                                          Together in Cells                                      51
    Diverse Group of Organisms on the Planet                  13                                                    Some Polar Molecules Form Acids and Bases in Water           52
Archaea: The Most Mysterious Domain of Life                  15                                                    A Cell Is Formed from Carbon Compounds                    53
Organisms Occupy Most of Our Planet                        15                                                                               Cells Contain Four Major Families of Small Organic Molecules      53
Cells Can Be Powered by a Wide Variety of Free-Energy Sources    15                                                             The Chemistry of Cells Is Dominated by Macromolecules
Some Cells Fix Nitrogen and Carbon Dioxide for Other Cells        17                                                                               with Remarkable Properties                             54
Genomes Diversify Over Evolutionary Time, Producing                                                                   Noncovalent Bonds Specify Both the Precise Shape of a
   New Types of Organisms                               18                                                                    Macromolecule and Its Binding to Other Molecules           55
New Genes Are Generated from Preexisting Genes              19                                                        Summary                                              56
Gene Duplications Give Rise to Families of Related Genes
    Within a Single Genome                                20   CATALYSIS AND THE USE OF ENERGY BY CELLS             57
                                                                                  Cell Metabolism Is Organized by Enzymes                     57The Function of a Gene Can Often Be Deduced from
                                                                                Biological Order Is Made Possible by the Release of     Its Nucleotide Sequence                                20
                                                                    Heat Energy from Cells                                 58More Than 200 Gene Families Are Common to All
                                                                               Cells Obtain Energy by the Oxidation of Organic Molecules        61    Three Domains of Life                                  21
                                                                        Oxidation and Reduction Involve Electron Transfers              62Summary                                              21
                                                           Enzymes Lower the Activation-Energy Barriers That Block
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL    22                                                                     Chemical Reactions                                   63
Eukaryotic Cells Contain a Variety of Organelles                 23                                                           Enzymes Can Drive Substrate Molecules Along Specific
Mitochondria Evolved from a Symbiotic Bacterium                                                                         Reaction Pathways                                    64
    Captured by an Ancient Archaeon                        25                                                 How Enzymes Find Their Substrates: The Enormous
Chloroplasts Evolved from a Symbiotic Photosynthetic                                                                                Rapidity of Molecular Motions                            65
    Bacterium Engulfed by an Ancient Eukaryotic Cell            26                                                             The Free-Energy Change for a Reaction, ΔG, Determines
Eukaryotes Have Hybrid Genomes                           27                                                                   Whether It Can Occur Spontaneously                      66
Eukaryotic Genomes Are Big                               28                                                             The Concentration of Reactants Influences the Free-Energy
Eukaryotic Genomes Are Rich in Regulatory DNA                28                                                              Change and a Reaction’s Direction                        67
Eukaryotic Genomes Define the Program of Multicellular                                                             The Standard Free-Energy Change, ΔG°, Makes It Possible
   Development                                        29                                                                                 to Compare the Energetics of Different Reactions             67
Many Eukaryotes Live as Solitary Cells                        30                                                             The Equilibrium Constant and ΔG° Are Readily Derived from
Summary                                              31                                                                Each Other                                          68
MODEL ORGANISMS                                    31   The Free-Energy Changes of Coupled Reactions Are Additive      69
Mutations Reveal the Functions of Genes                      32    Activated Carrier Molecules Are Essential for Biosynthesis         69
Molecular Biology Began with a Spotlight on One Bacterium             The Formation of an Activated Carrier Is Coupled to
   and Its Viruses                                       33       an Energetically Favorable Reaction                       70
The Focus on E. coli as a Model Organism Has Accelerated            ATP Is the Most Widely Used Activated Carrier Molecule          71
   Many Subsequent Discoveries                           35    Energy Stored in ATP Is Often Harnessed to Join
A Yeast Serves as a Minimal Model Eukaryote                  36      Two Molecules Together                                72

=== Original PDF page 27 ===
xxvi   Contents


NADH and NADPH Are Important Electron Carriers              73    Enzymes Speed Reactions by Selectively Stabilizing
There Are Many Other Activated Carrier Molecules in Cells         75          Transition States                                     148
The Synthesis of Biological Polymers Is Driven by                     Enzymes Can Use Simultaneous Acid and Base Catalysis        148
   ATP Hydrolysis                                       76    Lysozyme Illustrates How an Enzyme Works                  149
Summary                                              78     Tightly Bound Small Molecules Add Extra Functions to Proteins    152
HOW CELLS OBTAIN ENERGY FROM FOOD                 80    The Cell Regulates the Catalytic Activities of Its Enzymes         155
Glycolysis Is a Central ATP-producing Pathway                 80      Allosteric Enzymes Have Two or More Binding Sites That Interact   155
Glycolysis Illustrates How Enzymes Couple Oxidation                  Two Ligands Whose Binding Sites Are Coupled Must Reciprocally
    to Energy Storage                                    83          Affect Each Other’s Binding                            157
Fermentations Produce ATP in the Absence of Oxygen           84    Symmetrical Protein Assemblies Produce Cooperative Allosteric
Organisms Store Food Molecules in Special Reservoirs           85         Transitions                                         158
Between Meals, Most Animal Cells Derive Their Energy                Many Changes in Proteins Are Driven by Protein Phosphorylation  159
    from Fatty Acids Obtained from Fat                       86   A Eukaryotic Cell Contains a Large Collection of Protein Kinases
Sugars and Fats Are Both Degraded to Acetyl CoA                        and Protein Phosphatases                             159
     in Mitochondria                                      87    The Regulation of the Src Protein Kinase Reveals How a
The Citric Acid Cycle Generates NADH by Oxidizing                             Protein Can Function as a Microprocessor                 161
    Acetyl Groups to CO2                                 88     Regulatory GTP-binding Proteins Are Switched On and
Electron Transport Drives the Synthesis of the Majority                            Off by the Gain and Loss of a Phosphate Group            162
    of the ATP in Most Cells                                90     Proteins Can Be Regulated by the Covalent Addition
Many Biosynthetic Pathways Begin with Glycolysis                                of Other Proteins                                    162
    or the Citric Acid Cycle                                 90    An Elaborate Ubiquitin-conjugating System Is Used
Animals Must Obtain All the Nitrogen and Sulfur                                  to Mark Proteins                                     163
   They Need from Food                                 91     Protein Complexes with Interchangeable Parts Make
Metabolism Is Highly Organized and Regulated                 92           Efficient Use of Genetic Information                      164
Summary                                              93   A GTP-binding Protein Shows How Large Protein
Problems                                             112       Movements Can Be Generated from Small Ones            166
References                                            114    Motor Proteins Produce Directional Movement in Cells           167
                                                                           Proteins Often Form Large Complexes That Function as Protein
                                                                   Machines                                          167
Chapter 3  Proteins                          115    The Disordered Regions in Proteins Are Critical for a
                                                                        Set of Different Functions                              168
THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS                  115                                                                           Scaffolds Bring Sets of Interacting Macromolecules Together
The Structure of a Protein Is Specified by Its Amino                                                                and Concentrate Them in Selected Regions of a Cell         170
    Acid Sequence                                      115                                                                 Macromolecules Can Self-assemble to Form Biomolecular
Proteins Fold into a Conformation of Lowest Energy             121                                                                   Condensates                                       171
The α Helix and the β Sheet Are Common Folding Motifs        121     Classical Studies of Phase Separation Have Relevance
Four Levels of Organization Are Considered to Contribute                                                                                            for Biomolecular Condensates                          173
    to Protein Structure                                  123                                                    A Comparison of Three Important Types of Large Biological
Protein Domains Are the Modular Units from Which Larger                                                                       Assemblies                                        174
    Proteins Are Built                                    124                                                        Many Proteins Are Controlled by Covalent Modifications
Proteins Also Contain Unstructured Regions                  126                                                                         That Direct Them to Specific Sites Inside the Cell            175
All Protein Structures Are Dynamic, Interconverting Rapidly                                                    A Complex Network of Protein Interactions Underlies
   Between an Ensemble of Closely Related Conformations                                                                                       Cell Function                                       176
   Because of Thermal Energy                            126                                                                            Protein Structures Can Be Predicted and New Proteins
Function Has Selected for a Tiny Fraction of the Many                                                                     Designed                                          178
    Possible Polypeptide Chains                           126                                                        Summary                                             179
Proteins Can Be Classified into Many Families                 127                                                                 Problems                                             179
Some Protein Domains Are Found in Many Different Proteins      129                                                                    References                                            181
The Human Genome Encodes a Complex Set of Proteins,
    Revealing That Much Remains Unknown                  130
Protein Molecules Often Contain More Than One                   Chapter 4  DNA, Chromosomes, and Genomes    183
    Polypeptide Chain                                   130
Some Globular Proteins Form Long Helical Filaments            131   THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF DNA                 185
Protein Molecules Can Have Elongated, Fibrous Shapes         132   A DNA Molecule Consists of Two Complementary Chains of
Covalent Cross-Linkages Stabilize Extracellular Proteins          133        Nucleotides                                        185
Protein Molecules Often Serve as Subunits for the Assembly             The Structure of DNA Provides a Mechanism for Heredity        187
    of Large Structures                                  134      In Eukaryotes, DNA Is Enclosed in a Cell Nucleus               189
Many Structures in Cells Are Capable of Self-Assembly          136    Summary                                             189
Assembly Factors Often Aid the Formation of Complex             CHROMOSOMAL DNA AND ITS PACKAGING
    Biological Structures                                 136        IN THE CHROMATIN FIBER                           189
When Assembly Processes Go Wrong: The Case of                        Eukaryotic DNA Is Packaged into a Set of Chromosomes        190
    Amyloid Fibrils                                      137    Chromosomes Contain Long Strings of Genes                 191
Amyloid Structures Can Also Perform Useful Functions in Cells    139    The Nucleotide Sequence of the Human Genome Shows
Summary                                             140      How Our Genes Are Arranged                          193
PROTEIN FUNCTION                                   140    Each DNA Molecule That Forms a Linear Chromosome
All Proteins Bind to Other Molecules                         140       Must Contain a Centromere, Two Telomeres,
The Surface Conformation of a Protein Determines Its Chemistry   142       and Replication Origins                               195
Sequence Comparisons Between Protein Family Members            DNA Molecules Are Highly Condensed in Chromosomes         197
    Highlight Crucial Ligand-binding Sites                    142    Nucleosomes Are a Basic Unit of Eukaryotic Chromosome
Proteins Bind to Other Proteins Through Several Types                          Structure                                          197
    of Interfaces                                        143    The Structure of the Nucleosome Core Particle Reveals
Antibody Binding Sites Are Especially Versatile                 144      How DNA Is Packaged                               198
The Equilibrium Constant Measures Binding Strength            145    Nucleosomes Have a Dynamic Structure and Are
Enzymes Are Powerful and Highly Specific Catalysts            146         Frequently Subjected to Changes Catalyzed by
Substrate Binding Is the First Step in Enzyme Catalysis          146       ATP-dependent Chromatin-remodeling Complexes          200

=== Original PDF page 28 ===
                                                                        Contents   xxvii


Attractions Between Nucleosomes Compact the                 We Can Trace Human History by Analyzing Genomes           244
    Chromatin Fiber                                     202    The Sequencing of Hundreds of Thousands of Human
Summary                                             203       Genomes Reveals Much Variation                       245
THE EFFECT OF CHROMATIN STRUCTURE                        Most of the Variants Observed in the Human Population
  ON DNA FUNCTION                                 203        Are Common Alleles, with at Most a Weak Effect
Different Regions of the Human Genome Are Packaged                    on Phenotype                                      246
    Very Differently in Chromatin                            204     Forensic Analyses Exploit Special DNA Sequences with
Heterochromatin Is Highly Condensed and Restricts                           Unusually High Mutation Rates                          247
   Gene Expression                                    204    An Understanding of Human Variation Is Critical for
The Heterochromatic State Can Spread Along a                              Improving Medicine                                  248
   Chromosome and Be Inherited from One Cell Generation            Summary                                             248
    to the Next                                         205    Problems                                             249
The Core Histones Are Covalently Modified at Many                      References                                            251
     Different Sites                                       206
Chromatin Acquires Additional Variety Through
    the Site-specific Insertion of a Small Set of Histone Variants    208   Chapter 5  DNA Replication, Repair,
Covalent Modifications and Histone Variants Can                    and Recombination                       253
    Act in Concert to Control Chromosome Functions           208
                                                    THE MAINTENANCE OF DNA SEQUENCES                 253A Complex of Reader and Writer Proteins Can Spread Specific
                                                                      Mutation Rates Are Extremely Low                          253    Chromatin Modifications Along a Chromosome             210
                                                      Low Mutation Rates Are Necessary for Life as We Know It        254Barrier DNA–Protein Complexes Block the Spread
                                                        Summary                                             255    of Reader–Writer Complexes and Thereby Separate
    Neighboring Chromatin Domains                        212   DNA REPLICATION MECHANISMS                        255
Centromeres Have a Special, Inherited Chromatin Structure       213     Base-pairing Underlies DNA Replication and DNA Repair         255
Some Forms of Chromatin Can Be Directly Inherited            215    The DNA Replication Fork Is Asymmetrical                    256
The Abnormal Perturbations of Heterochromatin                       The High Fidelity of DNA Replication Requires Several
    That Arise During Tumor Progression Contribute to Many Cancers 215         Proofreading Mechanisms                             258
Summary                                             217   DNA Replication in the 5′-to-3′ Direction Allows Efficient Error
                                                                             Correction                                         260THE GLOBAL STRUCTURE OF CHROMOSOMES            217
                                                    A Special Nucleotide-polymerizing Enzyme SynthesizesChromosomes Are Folded into Large Loops of Chromatin        217
                                                                          Short RNA Primer Molecules                           260Polytene Chromosomes Are Uniquely Useful for Visualizing
                                                                          Special Proteins Help to Open Up the DNA Double Helix    Chromatin Structures                                 218
                                                                                                in Front of the Replication Fork                          261Chromosome Loops Decondense When the Genes Within
                                                    A Sliding Ring Holds a Moving DNA Polymerase onto the DNA    262   Them Are Expressed                                 220
                                                             The Proteins at a Replication Fork Cooperate to FormMammalian Interphase Chromosomes Occupy Discrete
                                                                   a Replication Machine                                263     Territories in the Nucleus, with Their Heterochromatin
                                                 DNA Replication Is Fundamentally Similar in Eukaryotes   and Euchromatin Distributed Differently                   220
                                                                and Bacteria                                       265A Biochemical Technique Called Hi-C Reveals Details
                                                    A Strand-directed Mismatch Repair System Removes    of Chromosome Organization                           221
                                                                                 Replication Errors That Remain in the Wake of theChromosomal DNA Is Organized into Loops by Large Protein Rings 223
                                                                                 Replication Machine                                  267Euchromatin and Heterochromatin Separate Spatially
                                                             The Accidental Incorporation of Ribonucleotides During     in the Nucleus                                      225
                                                    DNA Replication Is Corrected                           269Mitotic Chromosomes Are Highly Condensed                  227
                                                 DNA Topoisomerases Prevent DNA Tangling DuringSummary                                             228
                                                                                 Replication                                         269
HOW GENOMES EVOLVE                                229    Summary                                             272
Genome Comparisons Reveal Functional DNA Sequences
   by Their Conservation Throughout Evolution               230   THE INITIATION AND COMPLETION OF DNA REPLICATION
Genome Alterations Are Caused by Failures of the                           IN CHROMOSOMES                                 272
   Normal Mechanisms for Copying and Maintaining               DNA Synthesis Begins at Replication Origins                  272
   DNA, as Well as by Transposable DNA Elements            231     Bacterial Chromosomes Typically Have a Single Origin
The Genome Sequences of Two Species Differ in Proportion                      of DNA Replication                                   273
    to the Length of Time Since They Have Separately Evolved    232     Eukaryotic Chromosomes Contain Multiple Origins
Phylogenetic Trees Constructed from a Comparison of                            of Replication                                       273
   DNA Sequences Trace the Relationships of All Organisms     233      In Eukaryotes, DNA Replication Takes Place During
A Comparison of Human and Mouse Chromosomes                          Only One Part of the Cell Cycle                         276
   Shows How the Structures of Genomes Diverge            234     Eukaryotic Origins of Replication Are “Licensed” for Replication
The Size of a Vertebrate Genome Reflects the Relative                      by the Assembly of an Origin Recognition Complex          276
    Rates of DNA Addition and DNA Loss in a Lineage          236     Features of the Human Genome That Specify Origins
Multispecies Sequence Comparisons Identify Many                               of Replication Remain to Be Fully Understood              277
   Conserved DNA Sequences of Unknown Function           237     Properties of the ORC Ensure That Each Region of the
Changes in Previously Conserved Sequences Can                    DNA Is Replicated Once and Only Once in Each S Phase     277
    Help Decipher Critical Steps in Evolution                  238   New Nucleosomes Are Assembled Behind the Replication Fork    279
Mutations in the DNA Sequences That Control Gene                       Termination of DNA Replication Occurs Through the Ordered
    Expression Have Driven Many of the Evolutionary                        Disassembly of the Replication Fork                      280
   Changes in Vertebrates                               239    Telomerase Replicates the Ends of Chromosomes              281
Gene Duplication Also Provides an Important Source of                   Telomeres Are Packaged into Specialized Structures
    Genetic Novelty During Evolution                        240        That Protect the Ends of Chromosomes                  282
Duplicated Genes Diverge                                240    Telomere Length Is Regulated by Cells and Organisms           282
The Evolution of the Globin Gene Family Shows How                 Summary                                             284
   DNA Duplications Contribute to the Evolution of Organisms    241   DNA REPAIR                                          284
Genes Encoding New Proteins Can Be Created by                        Without DNA Repair, Spontaneous DNA Damage Would
    the Recombination of Exons                           242         Rapidly Change DNA Sequences                        286
Neutral Mutations Often Spread to Become Fixed in a Population,         The DNA Double Helix Is Readily Repaired                    288
    with a Probability That Depends on Population Size           243   DNA Damage Can Be Removed by More Than One Pathway     288

=== Original PDF page 29 ===
xxviii   Contents


Coupling Nucleotide Excision Repair to Transcription Ensures                  In Eukaryotes, Transcription Initiation Also Requires Activator,
    That the Cell’s Most Important DNA Is Efficiently Repaired     290         Mediator, and Chromatin-modifying Proteins               334
The Chemistry of the DNA Bases Facilitates Damage Detection    290     Transcription Elongation in Eukaryotes Requires Accessory
Special Translesion DNA Polymerases Are Used in Emergencies   292         Proteins                                           335
Double-Strand Breaks Are Efficiently Repaired                 292     Transcription Creates Superhelical Tension                    335
DNA Damage Delays Progression of the Cell Cycle             295     Transcription Elongation in Eukaryotes Is Tightly Coupled
Summary                                             295         to RNA Processing                                   337
HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION                        296   RNA Capping Is the First Modification of Eukaryotic
Homologous Recombination Has Common Features in All Cells    296       Pre-mRNAs                                        338
DNA Base-pairing Guides Homologous Recombination          296   RNA Splicing Removes Intron Sequences from Newly
Homologous Recombination Can Flawlessly Repair Double-Strand              Transcribed Pre-mRNAs                               339
    Breaks in DNA                                      297     Nucleotide Sequences Signal Where Splicing Occurs            341
Specialized Processing of Double-Strand Breaks Commits Repair       RNA Splicing Is Performed by the Spliceosome                341
    to Homologous Recombination                         298    The Spliceosome Uses ATP Hydrolysis to Produce a Complex
Strand Exchange Is Directed by the RecA/Rad51 Protein         298         Series of RNA–RNA Rearrangements                     343
Homologous Recombination Can Rescue Broken and Stalled              Other Properties of Pre-mRNA and Its Synthesis Help to
   DNA Replication Forks                                299         Explain the Choice of Proper Splice Sites                  345
DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination Entails Risks             RNA Splicing Has Remarkable Plasticity                      346
    to the Cell                                         300    Spliceosome-catalyzed RNA Splicing Evolved from RNA
Homologous Recombination Is Crucial for Meiosis              301          Self-splicing Mechanisms                              347
Meiotic Recombination Begins with a Programmed                      RNA-processing Enzymes Generate the 3′ End of Eukaryotic
    Double-Strand Break                                 302      mRNAs                                           348
Holliday Junctions Are Recognized by Enzymes That Drive                Mature Eukaryotic mRNAs Are Selectively Exported from
   Branch Migration                                    302         the Nucleus                                        349
Homologous Recombination Produces Crossovers Between             Noncoding RNAs Are Also Synthesized and Processed in
    Maternal and Paternal Chromosomes During Meiosis        304         the Nucleus                                        351
Homologous Recombination Often Results in Gene Conversion    305    The Nucleolus Is a Ribosome-producing Factory               353
Summary                                             306    The Nucleus Contains a Variety of Subnuclear Biomolecular
                                                                   Condensates                                       355
TRANSPOSITION AND CONSERVATIVE SITE-SPECIFIC                                                        Summary                                             357
   RECOMBINATION                                   306
Through Transposition, Mobile Genetic Elements Can Insert          FROM RNA TO PROTEIN                                358
     into Any DNA Sequence                               307    An mRNA Sequence Is Decoded in Sets of Three Nucleotides     358
DNA-only Transposons Can Move by a Cut-and-Paste                 tRNA Molecules Match Amino Acids to Codons in mRNA        359
   Mechanism                                        307    tRNAs Are Covalently Modified Before They Exit from the Nucleus  361
Some DNA-only Transposons Move by Replicating                           Specific Enzymes Couple Each Amino Acid to Its Appropriate
   Themselves                                        309       tRNA Molecule                                      361
Some Viruses Use a Transposition Mechanism to Move                      Editing by tRNA Synthetases Ensures Accuracy                363
    Themselves into Host-Cell Chromosomes                 309    Amino Acids Are Added to the C-terminal End of a Growing
Some RNA Viruses Replicate and Express Their Genomes                     Polypeptide Chain                                   364
    Without Using DNA as an Intermediate                   311    The RNA Message Is Decoded in Ribosomes                  365
Retroviral-like Retrotransposons Resemble Retroviruses,                   Elongation Factors Drive Translation Forward and Improve
    but Cannot Move from Cell to Cell                       313            Its Accuracy                                        368
A Large Fraction of the Human Genome Is Composed                   Induced Fit and Kinetic Proofreading Help Biological Processes
    of Nonretroviral Retrotransposons                       313       Overcome the Inherent Limitations of Complementary
Different Transposable Elements Predominate in                               Base-Pairing                                       369
     Different Organisms                                  314    Accuracy in Translation Requires a Large Expenditure of
Genome Sequences Reveal the Approximate Times at Which                  Free Energy                                        370
    Transposable Elements Have Moved                     314    The Ribosome Is a Ribozyme                              371
Conservative Site-specific Recombination Can Reversibly                  Nucleotide Sequences in mRNA Signal Where to Start Protein
    Rearrange DNA                                     315         Synthesis                                          373
Conservative Site-specific Recombination Can Be Used to               Stop Codons Mark the End of Translation                     374
    Turn Genes On or Off                                 316     Proteins Are Made on Polyribosomes                        375
Bacterial Conservative Site-specific Recombinases Have Become          There Are Minor Variations in the Standard Genetic Code         375
    Powerful Tools for Cell and Developmental Biologists         317     Inhibitors of Prokaryotic Protein Synthesis Are Useful
Summary                                             317        as Antibiotics                                       376
Problems                                             318     Quality-Control Mechanisms Act to Prevent Translation
References                                            320          of Damaged mRNAs                                 378
                                                                               Stalled Ribosomes Can Be Rescued                        379
                                                             The Ribosome Coordinates the Folding, Enzymatic Modification,
Chapter 6  How Cells Read the Genome:                      and Assembly of Newly Synthesized Proteins               380
  From DNA to Protein                      321     Molecular Chaperones Help Guide the Folding of Most Proteins    380
                                                                    Proper Folding of Newly Synthesized Proteins Is Also Aided by
FROM DNA TO RNA                                    323                                                                                   Translation Speed and Subunit Assembly                  383
RNA Molecules Are Single-Stranded                        324                                                                           Proteins That Ultimately Fail to Fold Correctly Are Marked
Transcription Produces RNA Complementary to One Strand                                                                                            for Destruction by Polyubiquitin                         384
    of DNA                                            325                                                             The Proteasome Is a Compartmentalized Protease with
RNA Polymerases Carry Out DNA Transcription                325                                                                      Sequestered Active Sites                              384
Cells Produce Different Categories of RNA Molecules            327                                                        Many Proteins Are Controlled by Regulated Destruction          386
Signals Encoded in DNA Tell RNA Polymerase Where to                                                                    There Are Many Steps from DNA to Protein                   387
    Start and Stop                                      328                                                        Summary                                             388
Bacterial Transcription Start and Stop Signals Are Heterogeneous
     in Nucleotide Sequence                               329   THE RNA WORLD AND THE ORIGINS OF LIFE               389
Transcription Initiation in Eukaryotes Requires Many Proteins      331     Single-Strand RNA Molecules Can Fold into Highly
To Initiate Transcription, RNA Polymerase II Requires a Set                      Elaborate Structures                                 390
    of General Transcription Factors                         332    Ribozymes Can Be Produced in the Laboratory                390

=== Original PDF page 30 ===
                                                                         Contents   xxix


RNA Can Both Store Information and Catalyze Chemical                     Transcription Circuits Allow the Cell to Carry Out Logic Operations  433
    Reactions                                          391    Summary                                             434
How Did Protein Synthesis Evolve?                         392   MECHANISMS THAT REINFORCE CELL MEMORY
All Present-Day Cells Use DNA as Their Hereditary                           IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS                            435
    Material                                           393     Patterns of DNA Methylation Can Be Inherited When Vertebrate
Summary                                             393         Cells Divide                                        435
Problems                                             394    CG-Rich Islands Are Associated with Many Genes in Mammals    436
References                                            395    Genomic Imprinting Is Based on DNA Methylation              438
                                                    A Chromosome-wide Alteration in Chromatin Structure Can Be
                                                                                    Inherited                                           440
Chapter 7  Control of Gene Expression          397    The Mammalian X-Inactivation in Females Is Triggered by
                                                                             the Synthesis of a Long Noncoding RNA                  442
AN OVERVIEW OF GENE CONTROL                       397     Stable Patterns of Gene Expression Can Be Transmitted
The Different Cell Types of a Multicellular Organism Contain                      to Daughter Cells                                    443
    the Same DNA                                      397    Summary                                             445
Different Cell Types Synthesize Different Sets of RNAs and Proteins 398    POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL CONTROLS                     445
The Spectrum of mRNAs Present in a Cell Can Be Used                     Transcription Attenuation Causes the Premature Termination
    to Accurately Identify the Cell Type                       400          of Some RNA Molecules                              445
External Signals Can Cause a Cell to Change the Expression               Riboswitches Probably Represent Ancient Forms of Gene
    of Its Genes                                        400         Control                                            446
Gene Expression Can Be Regulated at Many of the Steps                    Alternative RNA Splicing Can Produce Different Forms of
     in the Pathway from DNA to RNA to Protein                401        a Protein from the Same Gene                          446
Summary                                             402    The Definition of a Gene Has Been Modified Since the Discovery
CONTROL OF TRANSCRIPTION BY SEQUENCE-SPECIFIC                    of Alternative RNA Splicing                             448
   DNA-BINDING PROTEINS                            402    Back Splicing Can Produce Circular RNA Molecules            449
The Sequence of Nucleotides in the DNA Double Helix Can            A Change in the Site of RNA Transcript Cleavage and Poly-A
   Be Read by Proteins                                 402         Addition Can Change the C-terminus of a Protein           449
Transcription Regulators Contain Structural Motifs That Can                Nucleotides in mRNA Can Be Covalently Modified              450
   Read DNA Sequences                                403   RNA Editing Can Change the Meaning of the RNA Message      451
Dimerization of Transcription Regulators Increases Their                 The Human AIDS Virus Illustrates How RNA Transport from
     Affinity and Specificity for DNA                          406         the Nucleus Can Be Regulated                         452
Many Transcription Regulators Bind Cooperatively to DNA        407   mRNAs Can Be Localized to Specific Regions of the Cytosol      453
Nucleosome Structure Promotes Cooperative Binding                      Untranslated Regions of mRNAs Control Their Translation        456
    of Transcription Regulators                             408    The Phosphorylation of an Initiation Factor Regulates
DNA-Binding by Transcription Regulators Is Dynamic            409         Protein Synthesis Globally                             457
Summary                                             410      Initiation at AUG Codons Upstream of the Translation
TRANSCRIPTION REGULATORS SWITCH GENES                              Start Can Regulate Eukaryotic Translation Initiation          458
  ON AND OFF                                      410     Internal Ribosome Entry Sites Also Provide Opportunities
The Tryptophan Repressor Switches Genes Off                410          for Translational Control                               458
Repressors Turn Genes Off and Activators Turn Them On        411    Changes in mRNA Stability Can Control Gene Expression        459
Both an Activator and a Repressor Control the Lac Operon       412     Regulation of mRNA Stability Involves P-bodies and
DNA Looping Can Occur During Bacterial Gene Regulation       412         Stress Granules                                     461
Complex Switches Control Gene Transcription in Eukaryotes      414    Summary                                             462
A Eukaryotic Gene Control Region Includes Many cis-Regulatory         REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY NONCODING RNAs  462
   Sequences                                         414     Small Noncoding RNA Transcripts Regulate Many Animal
Eukaryotic Transcription Regulators Work in Groups             415       and Plant Genes Through RNA Interference                462
Activator Proteins Promote the Assembly of RNA Polymerase            miRNAs Regulate mRNA Translation and Stability               463
    at the Start Point of Transcription                        416   RNA Interference Also Serves as a Cell Defense Mechanism      464
Eukaryotic Transcription Activators Direct the Modification            RNA Interference Can Direct Heterochromatin Formation         465
    of Local Chromatin Structure                           417    piRNAs Protect the Germ Line from Transposable Elements       466
Some Transcription Activators Work by Releasing Paused            RNA Interference Has Become a Powerful Experimental Tool      467
   RNA Polymerase                                    418     Cells Have Additional Mechanisms to Hold Transposons
Transcription Activators Work Synergistically                   419       and Integrated Viral Genomes in Check                   467
Condensate Formation Likely Increases the Efficiency                       Bacteria Use Small Noncoding RNAs to Protect Themselves
    of Transcription Initiation                               420        from Viruses                                        468
Eukaryotic Transcription Repressors Can Inhibit Transcription             Long Noncoding RNAs Have Diverse Functions in the Cell        469
     in Several Ways                                     420    Summary                                             471
Insulator DNA Sequences Prevent Eukaryotic Transcription               Problems                                             472
    Regulators from Influencing Distant Genes                 422    References                                            474
Summary                                             422
MOLECULAR GENETIC MECHANISMS THAT CREATE
   AND MAINTAIN SPECIALIZED CELL TYPES              423   Chapter 8  Analyzing Cells, Molecules, and Systems 475
Complex Genetic Switches That Regulate Drosophila Development
    Are Built Up from Smaller Modules                       423    ISOLATING CELLS AND GROWING THEM IN CULTURE       476
The Drosophila Eve Gene Is Regulated by Combinatorial Controls  424     Cells Can Be Isolated from Tissues and Grown in Culture         476
Transcription Regulators Are Brought into Play by                          Eukaryotic Cell Lines Are a Widely Used Source of
     Extracellular Signals                                  426       Homogeneous Cells                                  478
Combinatorial Gene Control Creates Many Different Cell Types     427    Hybridoma Cell Lines Are Factories That Produce Monoclonal
Specialized Cell Types Can Be Experimentally Reprogrammed to                Antibodies                                         478
   Become Pluripotent Stem Cells                         428    Summary                                             480
Combinations of Master Transcription Regulators Specify Cell           PURIFYING PROTEINS                                  480
    Types by Controlling the Expression of Many Genes          429     Cells Can Be Separated into Their Component Fractions         480
Specialized Cells Must Rapidly Turn Some Genes On and Off     430     Cell Extracts Provide Accessible Systems to Study Cell Functions  482
Differentiated Cells Maintain Their Identity                     431     Proteins Can Be Separated by Chromatography               483

=== Original PDF page 31 ===
xxx   Contents


Immunoprecipitation Is a Rapid Affinity Purification Method       486     Expression of Individual Genes Can Be Measured Using
Genetically Engineered Tags Provide an Easy Way to Purify                       Quantitative RT-PCR                                 536
    Proteins                                           486     Global Analysis of mRNAs by RNA-seq Provides a Snapshot
Purified Cell-free Systems Are Required for the Precise Dissection                of Gene Expression                                  536
    of Molecular Functions                                486    Genome-wide Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Identifies
Summary                                             487         Sites on the Genome Occupied by Transcription Regulators   538
ANALYZING PROTEINS                                 487    Ribosome Profiling Reveals Which mRNAs Are Being
Proteins Can Be Separated by SDS Polyacrylamide-Gel                         Translated in the Cell                                 538
    Electrophoresis                                     487    Recombinant DNA Methods Have Revolutionized Human Health   539
Two-dimensional Gel Electrophoresis Provides Greater Protein              Transgenic Plants Are Important for Agriculture                 540
    Separation                                         489    Summary                                             542
Specific Proteins Can Be Detected by Blotting with Antibodies     490   MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CELL FUNCTION             542
Hydrodynamic Measurements Reveal the Size and Shape                  Regulatory Networks Depend on Molecular Interactions          543
    of a Protein Complex                                 490      Differential Equations Help Us Predict Transient Behavior         545
Mass Spectrometry Provides a Highly Sensitive Method                  Promoter Activity and Protein Degradation Affect the Rate
     for Identifying Unknown Proteins                        491          of Change of Protein Concentration                      546
Sets of Interacting Proteins Can Be Identified by                       The Time Required to Reach Steady State Depends on
    Biochemical Methods                                 493         Protein Lifetime                                     547
Optical Methods Can Monitor Protein Interactions              493     Quantitative Methods Are Similar for Transcription Repressors
Protein Structure Can Be Determined Using X-ray Diffraction      494       and Activators                                      548
NMR Can Be Used to Determine Protein Structure in Solution     496     Negative Feedback Is a Powerful Strategy in Cell Regulation      549
Protein Sequence and Structure Provide Clues About                    Delayed Negative Feedback Can Induce Oscillations            549
    Protein Function                                     497   DNA Binding by a Repressor or an Activator Can Be
Summary                                             498        Cooperative                                        551
ANALYZING AND MANIPULATING DNA                     498     Positive Feedback Is Important for Switchlike Responses
Restriction Nucleases Cut Large DNA Molecules into                      and Bistability                                       551
    Specific Fragments                                  498    Robustness Is an Important Characteristic of Biological
Gel Electrophoresis Separates DNA Molecules of Different Sizes   499        Networks                                          553
Purified DNA Molecules Can Be Specifically Labeled                  Two Transcription Regulators That Bind to the Same Gene
    with Radioisotopes or Chemical Markers in Vitro            501        Promoter Can Exert Combinatorial Control                 554
Genes Can Be Cloned Using Bacteria                       501    An Incoherent Feed-forward Interaction Generates Pulses        555
An Entire Genome Can Be Represented in a DNA Library         503   A Coherent Feed-forward Interaction Detects Persistent Inputs    556
Hybridization Provides a Powerful but Simple Way to Detect              The Same Network Can Behave Differently in Different
    Specific Nucleotide Sequences                         505         Cells Because of Stochastic Effects                      557
Genes Can Be Cloned in Vitro Using PCR                    506     Several Computational Approaches Can Be Used to Model
PCR Is Also Used for Diagnostic and Forensic Applications       507         the Reactions in Cells                                 557
PCR and Synthetic DNA Are Ideal Sources of Specific                           Statistical Methods Are Critical for the Analysis of Biological
   Gene Sequences for Cloning                           510        Data                                              558
DNA Cloning Allows Any Protein to Be Produced in Large              Summary                                             558
   Amounts                                          511    Problems                                             559
DNA Can Be Sequenced Rapidly by Dideoxy Sequencing        512    References                                            561
Next-Generation Sequencing Methods Have Revolutionized
   DNA and RNA Analysis                               514   Chapter 9  Visualizing Cells and Their Molecules   563
To Be Useful, Genome Sequences Must Be Annotated          516
                                                   LOOKING AT CELLS AND MOLECULES IN THE LIGHTSummary                                             518
                                                    MICROSCOPE                                     563
STUDYING GENE FUNCTION AND EXPRESSION             518    The Conventional Light Microscope Can Resolve Details
Classical Genetic Screens Identify Random Mutants with Specific               0.2 μm Apart                                       564
    Abnormalities                                       519    Photon Noise Creates Additional Limits to Resolution
Mutations Can Cause Loss or Gain of Protein Function          522      When Light Levels Are Low                            567
Complementation Tests Reveal Whether Two Mutations Are in the            Living Cells Are Seen Clearly in a Phase-Contrast or a
   Same Gene or Different Genes                          523         Differential-Interference-Contrast Microscope               567
Gene Products Can Be Ordered in Pathways by Epistasis                Images Can Be Enhanced and Analyzed by Digital Techniques     568
    Analysis                                           523     Intact Tissues Are Usually Fixed and Sectioned Before Microscopy 569
Mutations Responsible for a Phenotype Can Be Identified                    Specific Molecules Can Be Located in Cells by Fluorescence
    Through DNA Analysis                                524        Microscopy                                        570
Rapid and Cheap DNA Sequencing Has Revolutionized                    Antibodies Can Be Used to Detect Specific Proteins            572
   Human Genetic Studies                               524     Individual Proteins Can Be Fluorescently Tagged in Living Cells
Linked Blocks of Polymorphisms Have Been Passed Down                 and Organisms                                     573
    from Our Ancestors                                  525     Protein Dynamics Can Be Followed in Living Cells              575
Sequence Variants Can Aid the Search for Mutations                       Fluorescent Biosensors Can Monitor Cell Signaling             576
    Associated with Disease                              526    Imaging of Complex Three-dimensional Objects Is Possible
Genomics Is Accelerating the Discovery of Rare Mutations                      with the Optical Microscope                            577
    That Predispose Us to Serious Disease                   527    The Confocal Microscope Produces Optical Sections by
The Cellular Functions of a Known Gene Can Be Studied                      Excluding Out-of-Focus Light                           578
    with Genome Engineering                             527     Superresolution Fluorescence Techniques Can Overcome
Animals and Plants Can Be Genetically Altered                 528          Diffraction-limited Resolution                           580
The Bacterial CRISPR System Has Been Adapted to Edit                   Single-Molecule Localization Microscopy Also Delivers
   Genomes in a Wide Variety of Species                    530         Superresolution                                     583
Large Collections of Engineered Mutations Provide a Tool                 Expanding the Specimen Can Offer Higher Resolution, but
     for Examining the Function of Every Gene in an Organism     531         with a Conventional Microscope                         585
RNA Interference Is a Simple and Rapid Way to Test Gene Function 533    Large Multicellular Structures Can Be Imaged Over Time         586
Reporter Genes Reveal When and Where a Gene Is Expressed    534     Single Molecules Can Be Visualized by Total Internal Reflection
In Situ Hybridization Can Reveal the Location of mRNAs                      Fluorescence Microscopy                              587
   and Noncoding RNAs                                535    Summary                                             588

=== Original PDF page 32 ===
                                                                         Contents   xxxi


LOOKING AT CELLS AND MOLECULES IN THE ELECTRON          A P-type ATPase Pumps Ca2+ into the Sarcoplasmic
   MICROSCOPE                                     588        Reticulum in Muscle Cells                              647
The Electron Microscope Resolves the Fine Structure of the Cell   588    The Plasma Membrane Na+-K+ Pump Establishes Na+ and K+
Biological Specimens Require Special Preparation for Electron                  Gradients Across the Plasma Membrane                  648
    Microscopy                                        589   ABC Transporters Constitute the Largest Family of Membrane
Heavy Metals Can Provide Additional Contrast                 590         Transport Proteins                                   649
Images of Surfaces Can Be Obtained by Scanning Electron             Summary                                             651
    Microscopy                                        591   CHANNELS AND THE ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES
Electron Microscope Tomography Allows the Molecular                 OF MEMBRANES                                   651
    Architecture of Cells to Be Seen in Three Dimensions         593    Aquaporins Are Permeable to Water but Impermeable
Cryo-electron Microscopy Can Determine Molecular                             to Ions                                            652
    Structures at Atomic Resolution                         595     Ion Channels Are Ion-selective and Fluctuate Between
Light Microscopy and Electron Microscopy Are Mutually                  Open and Closed States                              653
    Beneficial                                          597    The Membrane Potential in Animal Cells Depends Mainly
Using Microscopy to Study Cells Always Involves Trade-Offs      598       on K+ Leak Channels and the K+ Gradient Across
Summary                                             599         the Plasma Membrane                                655
Problems                                             600    The Resting Potential Decays Only Slowly When the
References                                            601       Na+-K+ Pump Is Stopped                              655
                                                             The Three-dimensional Structure of a Bacterial K+ Channel
Chapter 10  Membrane Structure               603       Shows How an Ion Channel Can Work                    657
                                                                     Mechanosensitive Channels Allow Cells to Sense Their Physical
THE LIPID BILAYER                                    604        Environment                                        659
Glycerophospholipids, Sphingolipids, and Sterols Are                   The Function of a Neuron Depends on Its Elongated Structure     661
    the Major Lipids in Cell Membranes                      605     Voltage-gated Cation Channels Generate Action Potentials
Phospholipids Spontaneously Form Bilayers                   606           in Electrically Excitable Cells                            662
The Lipid Bilayer Is a Two-dimensional Fluid                   608     Myelination Increases the Speed and Efficiency of Action
The Fluidity of a Lipid Bilayer Depends on Its Composition        609         Potential Propagation in Nerve Cells                      666
Despite Their Fluidity, Lipid Bilayers Can Form Domains                  Patch-Clamp Recording Indicates That Individual Ion Channels
    of Different Compositions                              610       Open in an All-or-Nothing Fashion                       666
Lipid Droplets Are Surrounded by a Phospholipid Monolayer      611     Voltage-gated Cation Channels Are Evolutionarily and Structurally
The Asymmetry of the Lipid Bilayer Is Functionally Important      612        Related                                           668
Glycolipids Are Found on the Surface of All Eukaryotic Plasma                Different Neuron Types Display Characteristic Stable Firing
   Membranes                                        613         Properties                                         668
Summary                                             614     Transmitter-gated Ion Channels Convert Chemical Signals
MEMBRANE PROTEINS                                 615          into Electrical Ones at Chemical Synapses                 669
Membrane Proteins Can Be Associated with the Lipid Bilayer              Chemical Synapses Can Be Excitatory or Inhibitory             670
     in Various Ways                                     615    The Acetylcholine Receptors at the Neuromuscular Junction
Lipid Anchors Control the Membrane Localization of Some                    Are Excitatory Transmitter-gated Cation Channels           671
    Signaling Proteins                                   616    Neurons Contain Many Types of Transmitter-gated Channels      672
In Most Transmembrane Proteins, the Polypeptide Chain               Many Psychoactive Drugs Act at Synapses                   673
    Crosses the Lipid Bilayer in an α-Helical Conformation        617    Neuromuscular Transmission Involves the Sequential Activation
Transmembrane α Helices Often Interact with One Another       619          of Five Different Sets of Ion Channels                     673
Some β Barrels Form Large Channels                       619     Single Neurons Are Complex Computation Devices             674
Many Membrane Proteins Are Glycosylated                   621    Neuronal Computation Requires a Combination of at Least
Membrane Proteins Can Be Solubilized and Purified in Detergents  622        Three Kinds of K+ Channels                            675
Bacteriorhodopsin Is a Light-driven Proton (H+) Pump That                Long-term Potentiation in the Mammalian Hippocampus
    Traverses the Lipid Bilayer as Seven α Helices              625       Depends on Ca2+ Entry Through NMDA-Receptor Channels   677
Membrane Proteins Often Function as Large Complexes         627    The Use of Channelrhodopsins Has Revolutionized
Many Membrane Proteins Diffuse in the Plane of the Membrane    627         the Study of Neural Circuits                            678
Cells Can Confine Proteins and Lipids to Specific Domains             Summary                                             679
    Within a Membrane                                  629    Problems                                             680
The Cortical Cytoskeleton Gives Membranes Mechanical Strength          References                                            681
   and Restricts Membrane Protein Diffusion                 630
Membrane-bending Proteins Deform Bilayers                  632
Summary                                             633   Chapter 12  Intracellular Organization and
Problems                                             634       Protein Sorting                           683
References                                            635                                                    THE COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF CELLS                 683
                                                                                                   All Eukaryotic Cells Have the Same Basic Set of
Chapter 11  Small-Molecule Transport and                     Membrane-enclosed Organelles                         683
   Electrical Properties of Membranes           637     Evolutionary Origins Explain the Topological Relationships
                                                                                     of Organelles                                       686
PRINCIPLES OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT                 637    Macromolecules Can Be Segregated Without a Surrounding
Protein-free Lipid Bilayers Are Impermeable to Ions             638       Membrane                                         688
There Are Two Main Classes of Membrane Transport Proteins:               Multivalent Interactions Mediate Formation of Biomolecular
    Transporters and Channels                            638       Condensates                                       690
Active Transport Is Mediated by Transporters Coupled to                   Biomolecular Condensates Create Biochemical Factories         690
   an Energy Source                                    639     Biomolecular Condensates Form and Disassemble in Response
Summary                                             640         to Need                                           693
TRANSPORTERS AND ACTIVE MEMBRANE TRANSPORT     640     Proteins Can Move Between Compartments in Different Ways     694
Active Transport Can Be Driven by Ion-Concentration Gradients   642     Sorting Signals and Sorting Receptors Direct Proteins to
Transporters in the Plasma Membrane Regulate Cytosolic pH     644         the Correct Cell Address                              695
An Asymmetric Distribution of Transporters in Epithelial                     Construction of Most Organelles Requires Information in
    Cells Underlies the Transcellular Transport of Solutes         645         the Organelle Itself                                   697
There Are Three Classes of ATP-driven Pumps                 646    Summary                                             697

=== Original PDF page 33 ===
xxxii   Contents


THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM                         698    The Assembly of a Clathrin Coat Drives Vesicle Formation        752
The ER Is Structurally and Functionally Diverse                 698    Adaptor Proteins Select Cargo into Clathrin-coated Vesicles      753
Signal Sequences Were First Discovered in Proteins Imported              Phosphoinositides Mark Organelles and Membrane Domains      754
     into the Rough ER                                   701    Membrane-bending Proteins Help Deform the Membrane
A Signal-Recognition Particle (SRP) Directs the ER Signal                      During Vesicle Formation                              755
   Sequence to a Specific Receptor at the ER                702    Cytoplasmic Proteins Regulate the Pinching off and Uncoating
The Polypeptide Chain Passes Through a Signal Sequence–gated                of Coated Vesicles                                   756
   Aqueous Channel in the Translocator                     705    Monomeric GTPases Control Coat Assembly                  756
Translocation Across the ER Membrane Does Not Always                  Coat-recruitment GTPases Participate in Coat Disassembly       758
    Require Ongoing Polypeptide Chain Elongation             707    The Shape and Size of Transport Vesicles Are Diverse           759
Transmembrane Proteins Contain Hydrophobic Segments              Rab Proteins Guide Transport Vesicles to Their
    That Are Recognized Like Signal Sequences               709         Target Membrane                                    760
Hydrophobic Segments of Multipass Transmembrane Proteins           Rab Proteins Create and Change the Identity of an Organelle      761
    Are Interpreted Contextually to Determine Their Orientation    710   SNAREs Mediate Membrane Fusion                         762
Some Proteins Are Integrated into the ER Membrane by a                    Interacting SNAREs Need to Be Pried Apart Before They Can
    Post-translational Mechanism                          711        Function Again                                      763
Some Membrane Proteins Acquire a Covalently Attached                   Viruses Encode Specialized Membrane Fusion Proteins Needed
    Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) Anchor                 712          for Cell Entry                                       764
Translocated Polypeptide Chains Fold and Assemble in the             Summary                                             764
   Lumen of the Rough ER                               712   TRANSPORT FROM THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
Most Proteins Synthesized in the Rough ER Are Glycosylated by          THROUGH THE GOLGI APPARATUS                    765
    the Addition of a Common N-Linked Oligosaccharide        714     Proteins Leave the ER in COPII-coated Transport Vesicles        765
Oligosaccharides Are Used as Tags to Mark the State of                   Only Proteins That Are Properly Folded and Assembled Can
    Protein Folding                                      715        Leave the ER                                       766
Improperly Folded Proteins Are Exported from the ER and                   Vesicular Tubular Clusters Mediate Transport from the ER to
   Degraded in the Cytosol                               716         the Golgi Apparatus                                  766
Misfolded Proteins in the ER Activate an Unfolded Protein Response  717    The Retrieval Pathway to the ER Uses Sorting Signals           768
The ER Assembles Most Lipid Bilayers                       720    Many Proteins Are Selectively Retained in the Compartments
Membrane Contact Sites Between the ER and Other Organelles                    in Which They Function                               768
     Facilitate Selective Lipid Transfer                        722    The Golgi Apparatus Consists of an Ordered Series
Summary                                             723          of Compartments                                    769
PEROXISOMES                                        723     Oligosaccharide Chains Are Processed in the Golgi Apparatus     771
Peroxisomes Use Molecular Oxygen and Hydrogen Peroxide               Proteoglycans Are Assembled in the Golgi Apparatus            772
    to Perform Oxidation Reactions                         724    What Is the Purpose of Glycosylation?                       773
Short Signal Sequences Direct the Import of Proteins                       Transport Through the Golgi Apparatus Occurs by Multiple
     into Peroxisomes                                    724       Mechanisms                                       774
Summary                                             726     Golgi Matrix Proteins Help Organize the Stack                 775
THE TRANSPORT OF PROTEINS INTO MITOCHONDRIA             Summary                                             776
   AND CHLOROPLASTS                               726   TRANSPORT FROM THE TRANS GOLGI NETWORK
Translocation into Mitochondria Depends on Signal Sequences            TO THE CELL EXTERIOR AND ENDOSOMES             776
   and Protein Translocators                              727    Many Proteins and Lipids Are Carried Automatically from
Mitochondrial Proteins Are Imported Post-translationally as                     the Trans Golgi Network to the Cell Surface                777
    Unfolded Polypeptide Chains                           728   A Mannose 6-Phosphate Receptor Sorts Lysosomal Hydrolases
Protein Import Is Powered by ATP Hydrolysis, a Membrane                          in the Trans Golgi Network                             777
    Potential, and Redox Potential                          730     Defects in the GlcNAc Phosphotransferase Cause a Lysosomal
Transport into the Inner Mitochondrial Membrane Occurs Via                  Storage Disease in Humans                            779
    Several Routes                                      731     Secretory Vesicles Bud from the Trans Golgi Network            780
Bacteria and Mitochondria Use Similar Mechanisms to Insert               Precursors of Secretory Proteins Are Proteolytically Processed
   β Barrels into Their Outer Membrane                     733        During the Formation of Secretory Vesicles                781
Two Signal Sequences Direct Proteins to the Thylakoid Membrane          Secretory Vesicles Wait Near the Plasma Membrane Until
     in Chloroplasts                                      733        Signaled to Release Their Contents                      782
Summary                                             735     For Rapid Exocytosis, Synaptic Vesicles Are Primed at the
THE TRANSPORT OF MOLECULES BETWEEN THE NUCLEUS              Presynaptic Plasma Membrane                         782
   AND THE CYTOSOL                                 735     Synaptic Vesicles Can Be Recycled Locally After Exocytosis      783
Nuclear Pore Complexes Perforate the Nuclear Envelope         736     Secretory Vesicle Membrane Components Are Quickly Removed
Nuclear Localization Signals Direct Proteins to the Nucleus       738        from the Plasma Membrane                            784
Nuclear Import Receptors Bind to Both Nuclear Localization           Some Regulated Exocytosis Events Serve to Enlarge the Plasma
    Signals and NPC Proteins                             739       Membrane                                         785
The Ran GTPase Imposes Directionality on Nuclear Import                  Polarized Cells Direct Proteins from the Trans Golgi Network
    Through NPCs                                      740         to the Appropriate Domain of the Plasma Membrane         786
Nuclear Export Works Like Nuclear Import, but in Reverse        741    Summary                                             787
Transport Through NPCs Can Be Regulated by Controlling Access                                                  TRANSPORT INTO THE CELL FROM THE PLASMA
    to the Transport Machinery                             742                                                    MEMBRANE: ENDOCYTOSIS                         788
The Nuclear Envelope Disassembles and Reassembles                                                                            Pinocytic Vesicles Form from Coated Pits in the Plasma
    During Mitosis                                      743                                                            Membrane                                         789
Summary                                             745                                                                Not All Membrane Invaginations and Pinocytic Vesicles
Problems                                             746                                                                        Are Clathrin Coated                                  789
References                                            748                                                                                Cells Use Receptor-mediated Endocytosis to Import Selected
                                                                                       Extracellular Macromolecules                           791
Chapter 13  Intracellular Membrane Traffic        749     Specific Proteins Are Retrieved from Early Endosomes
                                                                and Returned to the Plasma Membrane                   792
MECHANISMS OF MEMBRANE TRANSPORT                           Recycling Endosomes Regulate Plasma Membrane Composition   793
   AND COMPARTMENT IDENTITY                       751    Plasma Membrane Signaling Receptors Are Down-regulated by
There Are Various Types of Coated Vesicles                   751        Degradation in Lysosomes                             794

=== Original PDF page 34 ===
                                                                        Contents    xxxiii


Early Endosomes Mature into Late Endosomes                795   CHLOROPLASTS AND PHOTOSYNTHESIS                 843
ESCRT Protein Complexes Mediate the Formation of Intralumenal           Chloroplasts Resemble Mitochondria but Have a Separate
    Vesicles in Multivesicular Bodies                         796         Thylakoid Compartment                               843
Summary                                             798     Chloroplasts Capture Energy from Sunlight and Use It
THE DEGRADATION AND RECYCLING OF                                     to Fix Carbon                                       844
   MACROMOLECULES IN LYSOSOMES                  798    Carbon Fixation Uses ATP and NADPH to Convert CO2
Lysosomes Are the Principal Sites of Intracellular Digestion       798          into Sugars                                        845
Lysosomes Are Heterogeneous                            799    Carbon Fixation in Some Plants Is Compartmentalized
Plant and Fungal Vacuoles Are Remarkably Versatile Lysosomes   800         to Facilitate Growth at Low CO2 Concentrations            846
Multiple Pathways Deliver Materials to Lysosomes              801    The Sugars Generated by Carbon Fixation Can Be Stored
Cells Can Acquire Nutrients from the Extracellular Fluid by                    as Starch or Consumed to Produce ATP                  849
    Macropinocytosis                                    802    The Thylakoid Membranes of Chloroplasts Contain the Protein
Specialized Phagocytic Cells Can Ingest Large Particles          802       Complexes Required for Photosynthesis and ATP Generation  849
Cargo Recognition by Cell-surface Receptors Initiates                       Chlorophyll–Protein Complexes Can Transfer Either Excitation
    Phagocytosis                                       803        Energy or Electrons                                  850
Autophagy Degrades Unwanted Proteins and Organelles         804   A Photosystem Contains Chlorophylls in Antennae and
The Rate of Nonselective Autophagy Is Regulated by Nutrient                a Reaction Center                                   851
     Availability                                         805    The Thylakoid Membrane Contains Two Different Photosystems
A Family of Cargo-specific Receptors Mediates Selective                     Working in Series                                    852
   Autophagy                                         806    Photosystem II Uses a Manganese Cluster to Withdraw
Some Lysosomes and Multivesicular Bodies Undergo Exocytosis  807         Electrons from Water                                 853
Summary                                             807    The Cytochrome b6-f Complex Connects Photosystem II to
Problems                                             808        Photosystem I                                      854
References                                            810    Photosystem I Carries Out the Second Charge-Separation
                                                                     Step in the Z Scheme                                855
                                                             The Chloroplast ATP Synthase Uses the Proton GradientChapter 14  Energy Conversion and Metabolic                                                                     Generated by the Photosynthetic Light Reactions
   Compartmentation: Mitochondria and                            to Produce ATP                                     855
   Chloroplasts                             811    The Proton-Motive Force for ATP Production in Mitochondria
                                                                and Chloroplasts Is Essentially the Same                  856
THE MITOCHONDRION                                 813                                                                Chemiosmotic Mechanisms Evolved in Stages                 856
The Mitochondrion Has an Outer Membrane and an Inner                                                          By Providing an Inexhaustible Source of Reducing Power,
   Membrane                                         814                                                                            Photosynthetic Bacteria Overcame a Major Evolutionary
Fission, Fusion, Distribution, and Degradation of Mitochondria     815                                                                        Obstacle                                          857
The Inner Membrane Cristae Contain the Machinery for Electron                                                             The Photosynthetic Electron-Transport Chains of
    Transport and ATP Synthesis                           817                                                                         Cyanobacteria Produced Atmospheric Oxygen and
The Citric Acid Cycle in the Matrix Produces NADH             817                                                                           Permitted New Life-Forms                             857
Mitochondria Have Many Essential Roles in Cellular Metabolism    818                                                        Summary                                             860
A Chemiosmotic Process Couples Oxidation Energy to ATP
    Production                                         821   THE GENETIC SYSTEMS OF MITOCHONDRIA
The Energy Derived from Oxidation Is Stored as an                   AND CHLOROPLASTS                               861
    Electrochemical Gradient                              822    The Genetic Systems of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
Summary                                             823       Resemble Those of Prokaryotes                         861
                                                                 Over Time, Mitochondria and Chloroplasts Have Exported
THE PROTON PUMPS OF THE ELECTRON-TRANSPORT CHAIN 823                                                                Most of Their Genes to the Nucleus by Gene Transfer        862
The Redox Potential Is a Measure of Electron Affinities           823                                                                      Mitochondria Have a Relaxed Codon Usage and Can
Electron Transfers Release Large Amounts of Energy            824                                                               Have a Variant Genetic Code                           864
Transition Metal Ions and Quinones Accept and Release Electrons                                                                          Chloroplasts and Bacteria Share Many Striking Similarities        865
    Readily                                            824                                                                           Organellar Genes Are Maternally Inherited in Animals and Plants   866
NADH Transfers Its Electrons to Oxygen Through Three Large                                                                      Mutations in Mitochondrial DNA Can Cause Severe
   Enzyme Complexes Embedded in the Inner Membrane       827                                                                                    Inherited Diseases                                   866
The NADH Dehydrogenase Complex Contains Separate Modules                                                    Why Do Mitochondria and Chloroplasts Maintain a Costly
     for Electron Transport and Proton Pumping                828                                                                       Separate System for DNA Transcription and Translation?      867
Cytochrome c Reductase Takes Up and Releases Protons                                                        Summary                                             868
   on Opposite Sides of the Crista Membrane, Thereby                                                                 Problems                                             869
   Pumping Protons                                    829                                                                    References                                            871
The Cytochrome c Oxidase Complex Pumps Protons
   and Reduces O2 Using a Catalytic Iron–Copper Center       831                                                   Chapter 15  Cell Signaling                     873Succinate Dehydrogenase Acts in Both the Electron-Transport
    Chain and the Citric Acid Cycle                         832    PRINCIPLES OF CELL SIGNALING                        873
The Respiratory Chain Forms a Supercomplex in the                          Extracellular Signals Can Act Over Short or Long Distances       874
    Crista Membrane                                    833     Extracellular Signal Molecules Bind to Specific Receptors         875
Protons Can Move Rapidly Through Proteins Along Predefined           Each Cell Is Programmed to Respond to Specific Combinations of
   Pathways                                          834          Extracellular Signals                                  876
Summary                                             835    There Are Three Major Classes of Cell-Surface Receptor Proteins  878
ATP PRODUCTION IN MITOCHONDRIA                    835     Cell-Surface Receptors Relay Signals Via Intracellular Signaling
The Large Negative Value of △G for ATP Hydrolysis Makes ATP                Molecules                                         879
    Useful to the Cell                                    835      Intracellular Signals Must Be Specific and Robust in a Noisy
The ATP Synthase Is a Nanomachine That Produces ATP by                 Cytoplasm                                         881
    Rotary Catalysis                                     837      Intracellular Signaling Complexes Form at Activated Cell-Surface
Proton-driven Turbines Are Ancient and Critical for Energy                    Receptors                                         882
    Conversion                                         839    Modular Interaction Domains Mediate Interactions Between
Mitochondrial Cristae Help to Make ATP Synthesis Efficient       840          Intracellular Signaling Proteins                          883
Special Transport Proteins Move Solutes Through the Inner              The Relationship Between Signal and Response Varies in Different
   Membrane                                         841         Signaling Pathways                                  885
Chemiosmotic Mechanisms First Arose in Bacteria              842    The Speed of a Response Depends on the Turnover of Signaling
Summary                                             842        Molecules                                         886

=== Original PDF page 35 ===
xxxiv   Contents


Cells Can Respond Abruptly to a Gradually Increasing Signal      887   Chapter 16  The Cytoskeleton                 949
Positive Feedback Can Generate an All-or-None Response       888
Negative Feedback Is a Common Feature of Intracellular              FUNCTION AND DYNAMICS OF THE CYTOSKELETON        949
    Signaling Systems                                   890     Cytoskeletal Filaments Are Dynamic, but Can Nevertheless
Cells Can Adjust Their Sensitivity to a Signal                   890       Form Stable Structures                               951
Summary                                             892    The Cytoskeleton Determines Cellular Organization and Polarity    952
                                                                        Filaments Assemble from Protein Subunits That ImpartSIGNALING THROUGH G-PROTEIN-COUPLED                                                                                  Specific Physical and Dynamic Properties                 953   RECEPTORS                                       892                                                                  Accessory Proteins and Motors Act on Cytoskeletal Filaments     955Heterotrimeric G Proteins Relay Signals from GPCRs            893                                                                       Molecular Motors Operate in a Cellular EnvironmentSome G Proteins Regulate the Production of Cyclic AMP         895                                                                  Dominated by Brownian Motion                         956Cyclic-AMP-dependent Protein Kinase (PKA) Mediates Most                                                        Summary                                             957    of the Effects of Cyclic AMP                            896
Some G Proteins Signal Via Phospholipids                    898    ACTIN                                               957
Ca2+ Functions as a Ubiquitous Intracellular Mediator            899     Actin Subunits Assemble Head-to-Tail to Create Flexible,
Feedback Generates Ca2+ Waves and Oscillations              900         Polar Filaments                                     958
Ca2+/Calmodulin-dependent Protein Kinases Mediate                      Nucleation Is the Rate-limiting Step in the Formation of
   Many Responses to Ca2+ Signals                        902         Actin Filaments                                      958
Some G Proteins Directly Regulate Ion Channels               904     Actin Filaments Have Two Distinct Ends That Grow at Different Rates  962
Smell and Vision Depend on GPCRs That Regulate Ion Channels  905    ATP Hydrolysis Within Actin Filaments Leads to Treadmilling
Nitric Oxide Gas Can Mediate Signaling Between Cells          908          at Steady State                                     962
Second Messengers and Enzymatic Cascades Amplify Signals    909    The Functions of Actin Filaments Are Inhibited by Both
GPCR Desensitization Depends on Receptor Phosphorylation     909         Polymer-stabilizing and Polymer-destabilizing Chemicals      963
Summary                                             910     Actin-binding Proteins Influence Filament Dynamics
                                                                and Organization                                    964SIGNALING THROUGH ENZYME-COUPLED RECEPTORS     911                                                                            Actin Nucleation Is Tightly Regulated and Generates BranchedActivated Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs) Phosphorylate                                                                                or Straight Filaments                                 964   Themselves                                        911                                                                            Actin Filament Elongation Is Regulated by Monomer-bindingPhosphorylated Tyrosines on RTKs Serve as Docking Sites                                                                               Proteins                                           967     for Intracellular Signaling Proteins                        913                                                                            Actin Filament–binding Proteins Alter Filament Dynamics andProteins with SH2 Domains Bind to Phosphorylated Tyrosines     913                                                                             Organization                                        968The Monomeric GTPase Ras Mediates Signaling by Most RTKs    915                                                                       Severing Proteins Regulate Actin Filament Depolymerization      970Ras Activates a MAP Kinase Signaling Module                 916                                                                           Bacteria Can Hijack the Host Actin Cytoskeleton               971Scaffold Proteins Reduce Cross-Talk Between Different MAP                                                                            Actin at the Cell Cortex Determines Cell Shape                971    Kinase Modules                                     918                                                                                   Distinct Modes of Cell Migration Rely on the Actin Cytoskeleton    972Rho Family GTPases Functionally Couple Cell-Surface                                                                               Cells Migrating in Three Dimensions Can Navigate Around Barriers 974    Receptors to the Cytoskeleton                          919                                                        Summary                                             975PI 3-Kinase Produces Lipid Docking Sites in the Plasma
   Membrane                                         920   MYOSIN AND ACTIN                                   976
The PI-3-Kinase–Akt Signaling Pathway Stimulates Animal                 Actin-based Motor Proteins Are Members of the
    Cells to Survive and Grow                             921        Myosin Superfamily                                  976
RTKs and GPCRs Activate Overlapping Signaling Pathways      923    Myosin Generates Force by Coupling ATP Hydrolysis
Some Enzyme-coupled Receptors Associate with Cytoplasmic                  to Conformational Changes                            977
    Tyrosine Kinases                                    923     Sliding of Myosin II Along Actin Filaments Causes Muscles
Cytokine Receptors Activate the JAK–STAT Signaling Pathway    924         to Contract                                         977
Extracellular Signal Proteins of the TGFβ Superfamily Act Through        A Sudden Rise in Cytosolic Ca2+ Concentration Initiates
    Receptor Serine/Threonine Kinases and Smads             926        Muscle Contraction                                  981
Summary                                             927     Heart Muscle Is a Precisely Engineered Machine               984
ALTERNATIVE SIGNALING ROUTES IN GENE REGULATION    928     Actin and Myosin Perform a Variety of Functions in Non-Muscle Cells 984
The Receptor Notch Is a Latent Transcription Regulator          928    Summary                                             986
Wnt Proteins Activate Frizzled and Thereby Inhibit β-Catenin           MICROTUBULES                                      987
    Degradation                                        930     Microtubules Are Hollow Tubes Made of Protofilaments          988
Hedgehog Proteins Initiate a Complex Signaling Pathway                   Microtubules Undergo a Process Called Dynamic Instability       988
     in the Primary Cilium                                 932     Microtubule Functions Are Inhibited by Both Polymer-stabilizing
Many Inflammatory and Stress Signals Act Through an                     and Polymer-destabilizing Drugs                        991
   NFκB-dependent Signaling Pathway                     934   A Protein Complex Containing γ-Tubulin Nucleates Microtubules   991
Nuclear Receptors Are Ligand-modulated Transcription                 The Centrosome Is a Prominent Microtubule Nucleation Site      991
    Regulators                                         935     Microtubule Organization Varies Widely Among Cell Types        993
Circadian Clocks Use Negative Feedback Loops to                        Microtubule-binding Proteins Modulate Filament Dynamics and
    Control Gene Expression                              937         Organization                                        995
Three Purified Proteins Can Reconstitute a Cyanobacterial                  Microtubule Plus End–binding Proteins Modulate Microtubule
    Circadian Clock in a Test Tube                          938       Dynamics and Attachments                            996
Summary                                             939     Tubulin-sequestering and Microtubule-severing Proteins Modulate
SIGNALING IN PLANTS                                 940        Microtubule Dynamics                                998
Multicellularity and Cell Communication Evolved Independently           Two Types of Motor Proteins Move Along Microtubules          999
     in Plants and Animals                                 940     Microtubules and Motors Move Organelles and Vesicles         1002
Receptor Serine/Threonine Kinases Are the Largest Class of                 Motile Cilia and Flagella Are Built from Microtubules and Dyneins  1004
    Cell-Surface Receptors in Plants                        941     Primary Cilia Perform Important Signaling Functions in Animal Cells 1005
Ethylene Blocks the Degradation of Specific Transcription              Summary                                            1006
    Regulatory Proteins in the Nucleus                       941    INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS AND OTHER CYTOSKELETAL
Regulated Positioning of Auxin Transporters Patterns                  POLYMERS                                       1007
    Plant Growth                                       943     Intermediate Filament Structure Depends on the Lateral Bundling
Phytochromes Detect Red Light, and Cryptochromes Detect                and Twisting of Coiled-Coils                           1007
    Blue Light                                          944     Intermediate Filaments Impart Mechanical Stability to
Summary                                             945        Animal Cells                                       1009
Problems                                             946     Linker Proteins Connect Cytoskeletal Filaments and Bridge
References                                            948         the Nuclear Envelope                                1011

=== Original PDF page 36 ===
                                                                        Contents   xxxv


Septins Form Filaments That Contribute to Subcellular Organization 1012     Actin and Myosin II in the Contractile Ring Guide the Process of
Bacterial Cell Shape and Division Depend on Homologs                        Cytokinesis                                       1065
    of Eukaryotic Cytoskeletal Proteins                      1013     Local Activation of RhoA Triggers Assembly and Contraction
Summary                                            1016          of the Contractile Ring                               1065
CELL POLARITY AND COORDINATION OF                          The Microtubules of the Mitotic Spindle Determine the Plane
   THE CYTOSKELETON                              1016          of Animal Cell Division                               1066
Cell Polarity Is Governed by Small GTPases in Budding Yeast    1016    The Phragmoplast Guides Cytokinesis in Higher Plants         1068
PAR Proteins Generate Anterior–Posterior Polarity                      Membrane-enclosed Organelles Must Be Distributed to
     in Embryos                                        1018        Daughter Cells During Cytokinesis                      1069
Conserved Complexes Polarize Epithelial Cells and Control            Some Cells Reposition Their Spindle to Divide Asymmetrically    1069
    Their Growth                                      1019     Mitosis Can Occur Without Cytokinesis                     1070
Cell Migration Requires Dynamic Cell Polarity                 1020    Summary                                            1070
External Signals Can Dictate the Direction of Cell Migration      1022    MEIOSIS                                            1071
Communication Among Cytoskeletal Elements Supports                   Meiosis Includes Two Rounds of Chromosome Segregation      1071
    Whole-Cell Polarity and Locomotion                     1023     Duplicated Homologs Pair During Meiotic Prophase            1073
Summary                                            1023    Homolog Pairing Culminates in the Formation of a Synaptonemal
Problems                                            1024       Complex                                         1073
References                                           1025    Homolog Segregation Depends on Several Unique
                                                                           Features of Meiosis I                                1075
Chapter 17  The Cell Cycle                   1027    Crossing-Over Is Highly Regulated                         1076
                                                                       Meiosis Frequently Goes Wrong                           1077
OVERVIEW OF THE CELL CYCLE                        1027    Summary                                            1077
The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle Usually Consists of Four Phases      1028   CONTROL OF CELL DIVISION AND CELL GROWTH         1077
Cell-Cycle Control Is Similar in All Eukaryotes                 1030    Mitogens Stimulate Cell Division                           1078
Cell-Cycle Progression Can Be Studied in Various Ways         1030     Cells Can Enter a Specialized Nondividing State               1078
Summary                                            1031    Mitogens Stimulate G1-Cdk and G1/S-Cdk Activities           1079
THE CELL-CYCLE CONTROL SYSTEM                    1031   DNA Damage Blocks Cell Division                         1080
The Cell-Cycle Control System Triggers the Major Events of             Many Human Cells Have a Built-In Limitation on the Number
    the Cell Cycle                                      1032          of Times They Can Divide                             1082
The Cell-Cycle Control System Depends on Cyclically Activated               Cell Proliferation Is Accompanied by Cell Growth              1083
    Cyclin-dependent Protein Kinases                      1033     Proliferating Cells Usually Coordinate Their Growth and Division   1084
Protein Phosphatases Reverse the Effects of Cdks             1035    Summary                                            1084
Hundreds of Cdk Substrates Are Phosphorylated in a Defined             Problems                                            1085
    Order                                            1035    References                                           1087
Positive Feedback Generates the Switchlike Behavior of
    Cell-Cycle Transitions                                1036   Chapter 18  Cell Death                      1089
The Anaphase-promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C) Triggers
    the Metaphase-to-Anaphase Transition                  1038    Apoptosis Eliminates Unwanted Cells                       1090
The G1 Phase Is a Stable State of Cdk Inactivity               1040    Apoptosis Depends on an Intracellular Proteolytic Cascade
The Cell-Cycle Control System Functions as a Linked Series                  Mediated by Caspases                              1091
    of Biochemical Switches                             1041     Activation of Cell-Surface Death Receptors Initiates the Extrinsic
Summary                                            1042       Pathway of Apoptosis                               1093
                                                             The Intrinsic Pathway of Apoptosis Depends on Proteins
S PHASE                                            1042                                                                      Released from Mitochondria                           1094
S-Cdk Initiates DNA Replication Once Per Cell Cycle           1043                                                                    Bcl2 Proteins Are the Critical Controllers of the Intrinsic Pathway
Chromosome Duplication Requires Duplication of                                                                                     of Apoptosis                                       1095
    Chromatin Structure                                 1045                                                        An Inhibitor of Apoptosis (an IAP) and Two Anti-IAP Proteins
Cohesins Hold Sister Chromatids Together                   1045                                                                      Help Control Caspase Activation in the Cytosol of Some
Summary                                            1046                                                               Mammalian Cells                                   1098
MITOSIS                                            1046     Extracellular Survival Factors Inhibit Apoptosis in Various Ways   1098
M-Cdk and Other Protein Kinases Drive Entry into Mitosis       1047     Healthy Neighbors Phagocytose and Digest Apoptotic Cells     1100
Condensin Helps Configure Duplicated Chromosomes                        Either Excessive or Insufficient Apoptosis Can Contribute
     for Separation                                     1047         to Disease                                        1100
The Mitotic Spindle Is a Dynamic Microtubule-based Machine    1050    Summary                                            1102
Microtubules Are Nucleated in Multiple Regions of the Spindle    1051    Problems                                            1103
Microtubule Instability Increases Greatly in Mitosis             1052    References                                           1104
Microtubule-based Motor Proteins Govern Spindle Assembly
   and Function                                      1052   Chapter 19  Cell Junctions and theBipolar Spindle Assembly in Most Animal Cells Begins
    with Centrosome Duplication                          1053       Extracellular Matrix                      1105
Spindle Assembly in Animal Cells Requires Nuclear-Envelope            CELL–CELL JUNCTIONS                               1108
   Breakdown                                       1054    Cadherins Form a Diverse Family of Adhesion Molecules        1108
Mitotic Chromosomes Promote Bipolar Spindle Assembly       1055    Cadherins Mediate Homophilic Adhesion                    1108
Kinetochores Attach Sister Chromatids to the Spindle          1056    Cadherin-dependent Cell–Cell Adhesion Guides the Organization
Bi-orientation Is Achieved by Trial and Error                  1057          of Developing Tissues                               1110
Multiple Forces Act on Chromosomes in the Spindle           1059    Assembly of Strong Cell–Cell Adhesions Requires Changes in
The APC/C Triggers Sister-Chromatid Separation and the                       the Actin Cytoskeleton                               1112
    Completion of Mitosis                               1060    Catenins Link Classical Cadherins to the Actin Cytoskeleton     1113
Unattached Chromosomes Block Sister-Chromatid Separation:            Adherens Junctions Respond to Tension from Inside and
   The Spindle Assembly Checkpoint                      1062        Outside the Tissue                                  1113
Chromosomes Segregate in Anaphase A and B               1062     Tissue Remodeling Depends on the Coordination of
Segregated Chromosomes Are Packaged in Daughter Nuclei                  Actin-mediated Contraction with Cell–Cell Adhesion        1114
    at Telophase                                       1063    Desmosomes Give Epithelia Mechanical Strength              1116
Summary                                            1064     Tight Junctions Form a Seal Between Cells and a Fence
CYTOKINESIS                                        1064       Between Plasma Membrane Domains                   1116

=== Original PDF page 37 ===
xxxvi   Contents


Tight Junctions Contain Strands of Transmembrane                     Cancer Cells Contain Somatic Mutations                    1166
    Adhesion Proteins                                  1119   A Single Mutation Is Not Enough to Change a Normal Cell into a
Scaffold Proteins Organize Junctional Protein Complexes       1120        Cancer Cell                                       1166
Gap Junctions Couple Cells Both Electrically and Metabolically   1121    Many Cancers Develop Gradually Through Successive Rounds of
A Gap-Junction Connexon Is Made of Six Transmembrane                Random Inherited Change Followed by Natural Selection    1167
   Connexin Subunits                                  1122    Cancers Can Evolve Abruptly Due to Genetic Instability         1168
In Plants, Plasmodesmata Perform Many of the Same Functions         Some Cancers May Harbor a Small Population of Stem Cells     1170
    as Gap Junctions                                   1123   A Common Set of Hallmarks Typically Characterizes Cancerous
Selectins Mediate Transient Cell–Cell Adhesions in the                      Growth                                           1171
    Bloodstream                                      1125    Cancer Cells Display an Altered Control of Growth and
Members of the Immunoglobulin Superfamily Mediate Ca2+-                  Homeostasis                                      1172
    independent Cell–Cell Adhesion                        1126   Human Cancer Cells Escape a Built-in Limit to Cell Proliferation   1173
Summary                                            1127    Cancer Cells Have an Abnormal Ability to Bypass Death Signals  1174
THE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF ANIMALS               1127    Cancer Cells Have Altered Sugar Metabolism                 1175
The Extracellular Matrix Is Made and Oriented by the                   The Tumor Microenvironment Influences Cancer Development    1175
    Cells Within It                                      1128    Cancer Cells Must Survive and Proliferate in a Foreign
Glycosaminoglycan (GAG) Chains Occupy Large Amounts                    Environment                                       1176
    of Space and Form Hydrated Gels                      1129    Summary                                            1178
Hyaluronan Acts as a Space Filler During Tissue Morphogenesis         CANCER-CRITICAL GENES: HOW THEY ARE FOUND
   and Repair                                        1129      AND WHAT THEY DO                               1178
Proteoglycans Are Composed of GAG Chains Covalently Linked          The Identification of Gain-of-Function and Loss-of-Function
    to a Core Protein                                   1130        Cancer Mutations Has Traditionally Required
Collagens Are the Major Proteins of the Extracellular Matrix      1132          Different Methods                                   1179
Collagen Chains Undergo a Series of Post-translational                     Retroviruses Led to the Identification of Oncogenes            1180
    Modifications                                      1133    Genes Mutated in Cancer Can Be Made Overactive in Many Ways  1181
Secreted Fibril-associated Collagens Help Organize the Fibrils    1135     Studies of Rare Hereditary Cancer Syndromes First Identified
Elastin Gives Tissues Their Elasticity                        1136       Tumor Suppressor Genes                            1182
Cells Govern and Respond to the Mechanical Properties of               Both Genetic and Epigenetic Mechanisms Can Inactivate Tumor
    the Matrix                                         1137        Suppressor Genes                                  1183
Fibronectin and Other Multidomain Glycoproteins Help                    Systematic Sequencing of Cancer Cell Genomes Has Transformed
    Organize the Matrix                                 1138       Our Understanding of the Disease                      1184
Fibronectin Binds to Integrins                             1139    Many Cancers Have an Extraordinarily Disrupted Genome       1185
Tension Exerted by Cells Regulates the Assembly of Fibronectin             Epigenetic and Chromatin Changes Contribute to Most Cancers  1185
     Fibrils                                            1140    Hundreds of Human Genes Contribute to Cancer             1186
The Basal Lamina Is a Specialized Form of Extracellular Matrix    1141     Disruptions in a Handful of Key Pathways Are Common to Many
Laminin and Type IV Collagen Are Major Components of                     Cancers                                          1187
    the Basal Lamina                                   1141     Mutations in the PI 3-kinase/Akt/mTOR Pathway Drive Cancer
Basal Laminae Have Diverse Functions                     1143         Cells to Grow                                      1188
Cells Have to Be Able to Degrade Matrix, as Well as                       Mutations in the p53 Pathway Enable Cancer Cells to Survive and
   Make It                                           1144          Proliferate Despite Stress and DNA Damage              1189
Matrix Proteoglycans and Glycoproteins Regulate the Activities             Studies Using Mice Help to Define the Functions of Cancer-critical
    of Secreted Proteins                                 1145       Genes                                           1190
Summary                                            1146    Cancers Become More and More Heterogeneous as They
CELL–MATRIX JUNCTIONS                             1147        Progress                                         1192
Integrins Are Transmembrane Heterodimers That Link the                   Colorectal Cancers Evolve Slowly Via a Succession of
    Extracellular Matrix to the Cytoskeleton                  1147          Visible Changes                                    1192
Integrin Defects Are Responsible for Many Genetic Diseases     1148   A Few Key Genetic Lesions Are Common to a Large Fraction of
Integrins Can Switch Between an Active and an Inactive                         Colorectal Cancers                                  1194
    Conformation                                      1149   Some Colorectal Cancers Have Defects in DNA Mismatch
Integrins Cluster to Form Strong Adhesions                  1151        Repair                                           1195
Extracellular Matrix Attachments Act Through Integrins to                The Steps of Tumor Progression Can Often Be Correlated
    Control Cell Proliferation and Survival                    1151         with Specific Mutations                              1196
Integrins Recruit Intracellular Signaling Proteins at Sites of                The Changes in Tumor Cells That Lead to Metastasis Are
    Cell–Matrix Adhesion                                1152             Still Largely a Mystery                                1197
Cell–Matrix Adhesions Respond to Mechanical Forces          1153    Summary                                            1197
Summary                                            1154   CANCER PREVENTION AND TREATMENT: PRESENT
                                                  AND FUTURE                                     1198
THE PLANT CELL WALL                                1154    Epidemiology Reveals That Many Cases of Cancer Are
The Composition of the Cell Wall Depends on the Cell Type      1155        Preventable                                       1198
The Tensile Strength of the Cell Wall Allows Plant Cells to                    Sensitive Assays Can Detect Those Cancer-causing Agents That
    Develop Turgor Pressure                             1155      Damage DNA                                      1199
The Primary Cell Wall Is Built from Cellulose Microfibrils Interwoven             Fifty Percent of Cancers Could Be Prevented by Changes in
    with a Network of Pectic Polysaccharides                1156          Lifestyle                                          1200
Oriented Cell Wall Deposition Controls Plant Cell Growth        1157     Viruses and Other Infections Contribute to a Significant
Microtubules Orient Cell Wall Deposition                     1158         Proportion of Human Cancers                         1201
Summary                                            1159    Cancers of the Uterine Cervix Can Be Prevented by Vaccination
Problems                                            1160         Against Human Papillomavirus                         1202
References                                           1162     Infectious Agents Can Cause Cancer in a Variety of Ways       1203
                                                             The Search for Cancer Cures Is Difficult but Not Hopeless       1204
                                                                                    Traditional Therapies Exploit the Genetic Instability and Loss of
Chapter 20  Cancer                         1163         Cell-Cycle Checkpoint Responses in Cancer Cells          1204
CANCER AS A MICROEVOLUTIONARY PROCESS           1163   New Drugs Can Kill Cancer Cells Selectively by Targeting
Cancer Cells Bypass Normal Proliferation Controls and Colonize                 Specific Mutations                                  1204
    Other Tissues                                      1164   PARP Inhibitors Kill Cancer Cells That Have Defects in Brca1
Most Cancers Derive from a Single Abnormal Cell             1165         or Brca2 Genes                                    1205

=== Original PDF page 38 ===
                                                                       Contents   xxxvii


Small Molecules Can Be Designed to Inhibit Specific Oncogenic         A Gene Expression Oscillator Acts as a Clock to Control
    Proteins                                          1207         Vertebrate Segmentation                             1249
Many Cancers May Be Treatable by Enhancing Immune                         Cell-intrinsic Timing Mechanisms Can Lead to Different Cell Fates 1251
   Responses                                        1209     Cells Rarely Count Cell Divisions to Time Their Development     1252
Immunosuppression Is a Major Hurdle for Cancer                      MicroRNAs Can Regulate Developmental Transitions           1252
   Immunotherapy                                    1210     Cell and Nuclear Size Relationships Schedule the Onset
Cancers Evolve Resistance to Therapies                    1212          of Zygotic Gene Expression                           1254
We Now Have the Tools to Devise Combination Therapies                Hormonal Signals Coordinate the Timing of Developmental
    Tailored to the Individual                              1212         Transitions                                        1255
Summary                                            1213     Environmental Cues Determine the Time of Flowering          1256
Problems                                            1214    Summary                                            1257
References                                           1216   MORPHOGENESIS                                    1257
                                                                   Imbalance in Physical Forces Acting on Cells Drives
                                                                    Morphogenesis                                    1258
Chapter 21  Development of Multicellular                      Tension and Adhesion Determine Cell Packing Within
   Organisms                             1217          Epithelial Sheets                                    1258
                                                                Changing Patterns of Cell Adhesion Molecules Force
OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT                          1218         Cells into New Arrangements                          1259
Conserved Mechanisms Establish the Core Tissues of Animals   1218     Repulsive Interactions Help Maintain Tissue Boundaries         1259
The Developmental Potential of Cells Becomes Progressively             Groups of Similar Cells Can Perform Dramatic Collective
    Restricted                                        1219        Rearrangements                                   1261
Cell Memory Underlies Cell Decision-Making                 1220     Planar Cell Polarity Orients Cell Behaviors Within an Embryo     1261
Several Model Organisms Have Been Crucial for Understanding          An Epithelium Can Bend During Development to Form a Tube    1263
   Development                                      1220     Interactions Between an Epithelium and Mesenchyme Generate
Regulatory DNA Seems Largely Responsible for the Differences                Branching Tubular Structures                          1264
   Between Animal Species                             1220    The Extracellular Matrix Also Influences Tissue Shape          1265
Small Numbers of Conserved Cell–Cell Signaling Pathways                   Cell Migration Is Guided by Environmental Signals             1266
    Coordinate Spatial Patterning                          1221    The Distribution of Migrant Cells Depends on Survival Factors    1267
Through Combinatorial Control and Cell Memory, Simple                     Cells Migrate in Groups to Achieve Large-Scale Morphogenetic
    Signals Can Generate Complex Patterns                 1221       Movements                                       1268
Morphogens Are Diffusible Inductive Signals That Exert                Summary                                            1269
   Graded Effects                                     1222
                                             GROWTH                                           1269Lateral Inhibition Can Generate Patterns of Different Cell Types   1223
                                                             The Proliferation, Death, and Size of Cells Determine OrganAsymmetric Cell Division Can Also Generate Diversity          1224
                                                                and Organism Size                                  1270Initial Patterns Are Established in Small Fields of Cells and
                                                            Changes in Cell Size Usually Result from Modified Cell Cycles    1271    Refined by Sequential Induction as the Embryo Grows       1225
                                                                     Animals and Organs Can Assess and Regulate Total Cell Mass   1272Developmental Biology Provides Insights into Disease and
                                                                          Various Extracellular Signals Stimulate or Inhibit Growth         1273    Tissue Maintenance                                 1225
                                                             The Hippo Pathway Relays Mechanical Signals RegulatingSummary                                            1226
                                                                  Growth                                           1273
MECHANISMS OF PATTERN FORMATION                 1226    Hormones Coordinate Growth Throughout the Body           1274
Different Animals Use Different Mechanisms to Establish                 The Duration of Growth Influences Organism Size             1275
    Their Primary Axes of Polarization                      1226    Summary                                            1275
Studies in Drosophila Have Revealed Many Genetic Control               Problems                                            1276
   Mechanisms Underlying Development                   1228    References                                           1278
Gene Products Deposited in the Egg Organize the Axes of
    the Early Drosophila Embryo                          1228
Three Groups of Genes Control Drosophila Segmentation
    Along the A-P Axis                                  1230   Chapter 22  Stem Cells in Tissue Homeostasis
A Hierarchy of Gene Regulatory Interactions Subdivides                and Regeneration                        1279
    the Drosophila Embryo                               1231
                                                 STEM CELLS AND TISSUE HOMEOSTASIS                1279Egg-Polarity, Gap, and Pair-Rule Genes Create a Transient Pattern
                                                          Stem Cells Are Defined by Their Ability to Self-renew and    That Is Remembered by Segment-Polarity and Hox Genes   1233
                                                                   Produce Differentiated Cells                           1280Hox Genes Permanently Pattern the A-P Axis                 1233
                                                             The Epithelial Lining of the Small Intestine Is ContinuallyHox Proteins Give Each Segment Its Individuality              1234
                                                            Renewed Through Cell Proliferation in Crypts              1281Hox Genes Are Expressed According to Their Order in
                                                                     Epidermal Stem Cells Maintain a Self-renewing, Waterproof,    the Hox Complex                                   1234
                                                                                            Epithelial Barrier on the Body Surface                   1282Trithorax and Polycomb Group Proteins Regulate Hox Expression
                                                                                   Cell Lineage Tracing Reveals the Location of Stem Cells    to Maintain a Permanent Record of Positional Information    1235
                                                                and Their Progeny                                  1284The D-V Signaling Genes Create a Gradient of the Transcription
                                                                    Quiescent Stem Cells Are Difficult to Identify by Lineage    Regulator Dorsal                                   1236
                                                                               Tracing                                           1285A Hierarchy of Inductive Interactions Subdivides the
                                                                    Hematopoietic Stem Cells Can Be Identified by Transplantation   1286    Vertebrate Embryo                                  1238
                                                    Some Tissues Do Not Require Stem Cells for TheirA Competition Between Secreted Signaling Proteins Patterns the
                                                                     Maintenance                                      1289    Vertebrate Embryonic Axes                           1239
                                                                                       In Response to Injury, Some Differentiated Cells Can Revert toHox Genes Control the Vertebrate A-P Axis                  1240
                                                                              Progenitor Cells and Some Progenitor Cells Can RevertSome Transcription Regulators Can Activate a Program
                                                                                  to Stem Cells                                      1289    That Defines a Cell Type or Creates an Entire Organ         1241
                                                    Some Tissues Lack Stem Cells and Are Not Renewable         1290Notch-mediated Lateral Inhibition Refines Cellular Spacing
                                                        Summary                                            1290    Patterns                                          1242
Cell-fate Determinants Can Be Asymmetrically Inherited         1244   CONTROL OF STEM-CELL FATE AND SELF-RENEWAL       1291
Evolution of Regulatory DNA Explains Many Morphological               The Stem-Cell Niche Maintains Stem-Cell Self-Renewal         1291
    Differences                                        1245    The Size of the Niche Can Determine the Number of Stem Cells  1292
Summary                                            1247    Asymmetric Stem-Cell Division Can Maintain Stem-Cell Number  1293
                                                                                       In Many Symmetric Stem-Cell Divisions, Daughter Cells ChooseDEVELOPMENTAL TIMING                              1248
                                                                                  Their Fates Independently and Stochastically              1294Molecular Lifetimes Play a Critical Part in Developmental
                                                    A Decline in Stem-Cell Function Contributes to Tissue Aging     1294    Timing                                           1248

=== Original PDF page 39 ===
xxxviii   Contents


Summary                                            1296   THE HUMAN MICROBIOTA                             1347
REGENERATION AND REPAIR                           1296    The Human Microbiota Is a Complex Ecological System         1347
Planarian Flatworms Contain Stem Cells That Can Regenerate            The Microbiota Influences Our Development and Health         1348
   a Whole New Body                                 1297    Summary                                            1349
Some Vertebrates Can Regenerate Entire Limbs and Organs     1298    Problems                                            1350
Stem Cells Can Be Used Clinically to Replace Lost Hematopoietic          References                                           1351
    or Skin Cells                                       1299
Neural Stem Cells Can Be Manipulated in Culture and Used to
    Repopulate a Diseased Central Nervous System           1299   Chapter 24  The Innate and Adaptive
Summary                                            1300     Immune Systems                        1353
CELL REPROGRAMMING AND PLURIPOTENT STEM CELLS  1300                                                    THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM                          1354
Nuclei Can Be Reprogrammed by Transplantation into Foreign                                                                                       Epithelial Surfaces Serve as Barriers to Infection               1354
   Cytoplasm                                        1301                                                                          Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) Recognize Conserved
Reprogramming of a Transplanted Nucleus Involves Drastic                                                                           Features of Pathogens                               1354
   Changes in Chromatin                               1301                                                                    There Are Multiple Families of PRRs                        1355
Embryonic Stem (ES) Cells Can Generate Any Part of the Body   1302                                                                          Activated PRRs Trigger an Inflammatory Response at Sites
A Core Set of Transcription Regulators Defines and Maintains                                                                                     of Infection                                        1356
    the ES-Cell State                                   1303                                                                     Phagocytic Cells Seek, Engulf, and Destroy Pathogens         1358
Fibroblasts Can Be Reprogrammed to Create Induced Pluripotent                                                           Complement Activation Targets Pathogens for Phagocytosis
   Stem (iPS) Cells                                    1303                                                                                or Lysis                                          1358
Reprogramming Involves a Massive Upheaval of the Gene Control                                                                              Virus-infected Cells Take Drastic Measures to Prevent
   System                                          1304                                                                                                Viral Replication                                    1360
An Experimental Manipulation of Factors That Modify Chromatin                                                                           Natural Killer Cells Induce Virus-infected Cells to Kill Themselves  1361
   Can Increase Reprogramming Efficiencies                1305                                                                              Dendritic Cells Provide the Link Between the Innate
ES and iPS Cells Can Be Guided to Generate Specific Adult Cell                                                                and Adaptive Immune Systems                        1362
    Types and Even Organoids                            1306                                                        Summary                                            1362
Cells of One Specialized Type Can Be Forced to Transdifferentiate
     Directly into Another                                 1306   OVERVIEW OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM           1364
ES and iPS Cells Are Also Useful for Drug Discovery and Analysis        B Cells Develop in the Bone Marrow, T Cells in the Thymus      1365
    of Disease                                        1308    Immunological Memory Depends on Both Clonal Expansion
Summary                                            1309       and Lymphocyte Differentiation                        1366
Problems                                            1310    Most B and T Cells Continually Recirculate Through Peripheral
References                                           1312       Lymphoid Organs                                   1368
                                                                     Immunological Self-tolerance Ensures That B and T Cells
                                                        Do Not Attack Normal Host Cells and Molecules           1370
                                                        Summary                                            1372
Chapter 23  Pathogens and Infection           1313
                                                B CELLS AND IMMUNOGLOBULINS                      1372
INTRODUCTION TO PATHOGENS                        1313   B Cells Make Immunoglobulins (Igs) as Both Cell-Surface
Pathogens Can Be Viruses, Bacteria, or Eukaryotes            1314        Antigen Receptors and Secreted Antibodies              1373
Pathogens Interact with Their Hosts in Different Ways          1314    Mammals Make Five Classes of Igs                        1373
Bacteria Are Diverse and Occupy a Remarkable Variety                        Ig Light and Heavy Chains of Antibodies Consist of Constant
    of Ecological Niches                                 1315       and Variable Regions                                1375
Bacterial Pathogens Carry Specialized Virulence Genes         1317     Ig Genes Are Assembled from Separate Gene Segments
Bacterial Virulence Genes Encode Toxins and Secretion Systems               During B Cell Development                           1377
    That Deliver Effector Proteins to Host Cells                1319     Antigen-driven Somatic Hypermutation Fine-Tunes
Fungal and Protozoan Parasites Have Complex Life Cycles                    Antibody Responses                                1379
    Involving Multiple Forms                              1321   B Cells Can Switch the Class of Ig They Make                1379
All Aspects of Viral Propagation Depend on Host-Cell Machinery  1322    Summary                                            1381
Summary                                            1325    T CELLS AND MHC PROTEINS                          1382
CELL BIOLOGY OF PATHOGEN INFECTION                1325    T Cell Receptors (TCRs) Are Ig‑like Heterodimers              1382
Pathogens Breach Epithelial Barriers to Infect the Host          1326     Activated Dendritic Cells Activate Naïve T Cells               1383
Pathogens That Colonize an Epithelium Must Overcome                T Cells Recognize Foreign Peptides Bound to MHC Proteins     1384
     Its Protective Mechanisms                            1326   MHC Proteins Are the Most Polymorphic Human
Extracellular Pathogens Use Toxins and Contact-dependent                     Proteins Known                                    1388
    Secretion Systems to Disturb Host Cells Without                 CD4 and CD8 Co-receptors on T Cells Bind to Invariant
    Entering Them                                     1328         Parts of MHC Proteins                               1389
Intracellular Pathogens Have Mechanisms for Both Entering                Developing Thymocytes Undergo Positive and Negative Selection  1389
   and Leaving Host Cells                              1329     Cytotoxic T Cells Induce Infected Target Cells to Undergo Apoptosis 1391
Viruses Bind to Virus Receptors at the Host-Cell Surface        1329     Effector Helper T Cells Help Activate Other Cells of the
Viruses Enter Host Cells by Membrane Fusion, Pore Formation,                 Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems                   1392
    or Membrane Disruption                              1330    Naïve Helper T Cells Can Differentiate into Different Types
Bacteria Enter Host Cells by Phagocytosis                   1331          of Effector T Cells                                   1393
Intracellular Eukaryotic Parasites Actively Invade Host Cells      1333    Both T and B Cells Require Multiple Extracellular Signals
Some Intracellular Pathogens Escape from the Phagosome                         for Activation                                      1394
     into the Cytosol                                    1334    Many Cell-Surface Proteins Belong to the Ig Superfamily        1396
Many Pathogens Alter Membrane Traffic in the Host Cell                    Vaccination Against Pathogens Has Been Immunology’s
    to Survive and Replicate                              1335         Greatest Contribution to Human Health                  1396
Bacteria and Viruses Use the Host-Cell Cytoskeleton for               Summary                                            1400
     Intracellular Movement                               1338    Problems                                            1402
Many Microbes Manipulate Autophagy                      1340    References                                           1404
Viruses Can Take Over the Metabolism of the Host Cell         1340
Pathogens Can Evolve Rapidly by Antigenic Variation           1341   Glossary                                    G:1Error-prone Replication Dominates Viral Evolution              1343
Drug-resistant Pathogens Are a Growing Problem             1344   Index                                                          I:1
Summary                                            1346